Improving the Energy
in Your Life

and techniques for improving the energy in your life. You will learn to
harmonize and lay out spaces in your home to enhance your personal
energy, improve your overall well-being, and bring good fortune and
balance into your life. Bartlett oﬀers suggestions that target career and
prosperity, love and relationships, and health.
This plain and simple guide discusses how to:

• Declutter to clear the energy in your home
• Use the Chinese bagua (number square) to map out rooms to

•

This wonderful primer is for anyone interested in interior design, Chinese
legend and lore, and the creation of healing and harmonious living spaces.

FENG SHUI

Sarah Bartlett

P
L
A
I
N
&
S
I
M
P
L
E

PLAIN & SIMPLE

•

enhance energy
Employ the ﬁve elements to harmonize the energy of your
home
Use Feng Shui for the exterior of your home and outside
landscaping

FE N G S H U I

This simple guide to the art of Feng Shui provides easy-to-use tips

Bartlett

Your Guide to

www.redwheelweiser.com
U.S. $14.95

THE ONLY BOOK YOU’LL EVER NEED

feng shui
plai n

&

si m ple

feng shui
plai n

&

si m ple

Sarah Bartlett

t h e o n ly b o o k y o u ’ l l e v e r n e e d

Copyright © 2010, 2018
by Sarah Bartlett
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or
by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or
by any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from
Hampton Roads Publishing Company, Inc. Reviewers may quote brief passages.
Previously published in 2010 as Simply Feng Shui
by Sterling Publishing Co, NY and Zambezi Publishing Limited, Devon, UK.

Cover design by Jim Warner
Interior design by Kathryn Sky-Peck
Hampton Roads Publishing Company, Inc.
Charlottesville, VA 22906
Distributed by Red Wheel/Weiser, llc
www.redwheelweiser.com
Sign up for our newsletter and special offers by going to
www.redwheelweiser.com/newsletter/
ISBN: 978-1-57174-789-1
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data available upon request
Printed in the United States of America
IBI
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

Contents
Introduction: What Is Feng Shui?. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 1
1

Making a Start.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 7

2

The Bagua. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 15

3

The Bagua Sectors .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 25

4

The Five Elements. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 39

5

Kua Number: Your Personal Best Direction .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 49

6

The Environment. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 57

7

Harmonizing Ch’i in the Home .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 65

8

Your Elemental Energy Type .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 81

9

Creating a Sacred Corner.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 93

10

Love and Relationships. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 101

11

Prosperity and Career. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 119

12

Career Choices. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 129

13

Balancing Energy through Décor .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 139

What Is
Feng Shui?

I
N
T
R
O
D
U
C
T
I
O
N

T

his book is a simple guide to the Chinese art of Feng Shui. It
provides you with lots of tips and secrets that you can use

right away to improve your lifestyle. By harmonizing and changing
the spaces in your home, not only will you enhance your personal
energy for emotional, physical, and material well-being, but you
will also bring good fortune into your life.
Feng Shui (pronounced foong shway) is the ancient Chinese art
of furniture and object placement to create positive energy ﬂow
around the home. A harmonious home means a harmonious lifestyle. The ancient Chinese believed that the world, humankind,
and all of nature were connected by a ﬂow of universal energy
called Ch’i. (The Indian equivalent is prana; the Japanese, ki). This
Ch’i was made up of two qualities, “feng” and “shui.” “Feng” means
wind and “shui” means water. Feng, or wind, energy is active,
dynamic, yang energy; shui, or water, energy is passive, receptive,
yin energy.
It was the channeling and harmonizing of these two forces in
nature that became known as Feng Shui to the ancient mystics.

2

Feng

Shui

wind

water

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

More than three thousand years ago, the Taoist mystics used Feng
Shui to determine auspicious locations for ancestral tombs, as
well as to enhance their sexual energy. According to the Taoists,
the key to long life and happiness was to be found through energizing the ﬂow of Ch’i during lovemaking.
Many Eastern cultures have over the centuries relied on the
art and science of Feng Shui to plan sites for houses, oﬃces, gardens, and interiors. This practice has now become popular in the
West, and we can use these basic principles and tried-and-true
methods to achieve harmonious energy in the home. This process enhances our well-being and creates beneficial energy to
improve our lives.

How Does It Work?
Ch’i ﬂows everywhere. It is a universal unseen force that ﬂows
through the environment and our bodies. Many Eastern therapies, such as shiatsu, acupuncture, and Chinese herbal medicine,
are based on this energy system. Practitioners subtly change the
energy ﬂow within the body to remove blockages or stagnant
areas that could create illness. Similarly, Ch’i can ﬂow through a
garden, down the road, and into your home, but for you to benefit
from the energy in your living space, the currents need to be free
to ﬂow throughout the home; blocked or stagnant energy spots
create disharmony.
Ch’i energy always moves in spirals, and this movement needs
to be enhanced. Negative energy, called “Sha Ch’i” moves in
straight lines and is referred to as “secret arrows” in Feng Shui.

INTRODUcTION

3

A traditional Lo Pan, a powerful Chinese compass used in Feng Shi.

This is why sharp corners, beams, and straight lines in the home
need to be modified, changed, or given a “cure” to create a ﬂowing environment.
There are several different schools of Feng Shui thought. One
is based on a scientific and classical approach that uses astronomy, astrology, and a powerful Chinese compass called a “Lo
Pan.” Another concentrates solely on cures and enhancements,
and a third is a blend of intuition and spiritual awareness. This
book shows you how to try out some of the simpler principles
of this highly organized system. Remember that the changes you

4

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

make or create in your home are intended to make the energy
work for your benefit.
My book doesn’t tell you to knock down half your home or
to move your front door or your bathroom to a more auspicious
area. Instead, I show you how to use mirrors and other ornaments,
which we call “Bagua cures” to encourage good Ch’i energies to
enter your home and to remain there for good.
I wish you all the best with your Feng Shui efforts and hope
that you get the love, luck, and good health that you desire.

INTRODUcTION

5

Making
a Start

1

B

efore you do anything, you must first clear away any negative or bad energy that’s been dormant in the house, home,

or workplace. If you want to start afresh, there’s nothing like
clearing out all the clutter and cleansing the spaces of your
home and hearth.

Decluttering
To accomplish this task successfully, you have to be ruthless with
yourself and your family, so approach each room in turn and decide
whether you really need those things that are piling up in the closets. You might even have boxes full of things you’ve forgotten
about stored in the attic or cellar, so don’t neglect these areas, as
they can harbor stagnant or negative energy. Before steaming in
with the vacuum cleaner and the trash bags, though, understand
why you are doing this, because understanding the process is as
essential as doing it. Also bear in mind that while it may feel difficult to throw things out, once the junk is gone, it’s remarkable
how quickly you’ll forget about it. The number of possessions you
have is also a symbol of the type of person you are. The more junk
you hoard, the more likely it is you need to reassess your values.
Why are you so acquisitive? Do you feel insecure without possessions? Similarly, if you live in a minimalist cell, you might need to ask
whether your values incorporate the needs of others.
Once you have decluttered your home, you’ll feel not only
virtuous but also excited about the fresh start you’re making
on this new phase in your life. Now you need to cleanse the
empty spaces of your home and revitalize the home with positive energy.

8

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

Space-Clearing Techniques
There are many ways to clear away negative energy and revitalize
the home. Here are some suggestions. If you don’t like one idea,
then try another that suits you better. Some individuals might like
clapping, while others might like purging with candles or incense,
so take your pick.

1.

Burning

Cleanse a whole house or room by burning small perfumed candles in each room. Let the candle burn right down before you
extinguish it. Alternatively, use incense—sandalwood, lavender,
and geranium essences are the best fragrances, but this is a matter of personal taste. Candles burn away negative energy and
reconnect vibrations and an atmosphere that is reﬂective of you.
Use colors that are suited to your needs, for example, white for
purification and clarification, red for passion, blue for career prospects, green for friendship, yellow for good communication.
Note: Be very careful not to leave any burning candles unattended when you leave a room, as this could present a significant
fire danger.

2.

Clapping

Walk around the room or house and clap your hands briskly and
rhythmically. Don’t forget to clap in dark corners and at ceiling
height, too. The sound of your hands will become a mantra for
the energy, and you will soon start to feel the energy shifting and
becoming clearer.

M A K I N G A S TA RT

9

3.

Sweeping

In Malaysia, Feng Shui practitioners often used an old bird-ofparadise nest that they tied to the end of a piece of twine and
then whirled around in the air. However, a broom or a large spray
of dead branches will work equally well. Lift the broom and sweep
it through the air to stir and disperse any negative energy. Another
method is to move your hands with open fingers through the air;
if you feel any resistance, just push it away with wide sweeping
movements of your arms.

4.

Laid-Back Space Clearing

Sit cross-legged on the ﬂoor. Write a letter to the room or home
and tell it that the changes you are about to make are functional,
beneficial, and spiritual. Convey that the energy needs to be
channeled for the benefit of you, your home, your workplace, and
the world. Once you’ve read your letter out loud to the room,
burn it or bury it in grand ceremonial style.

5.

Touching

Touch all the things you are going to keep. Give them a name and
make them feel wanted and loved. Touch the walls and the ﬂoor,
too. This emotional contact with inanimate objects may sound
silly, but you are acknowledging the presence of everything in the
home, which has its own hidden positive energy, too. This way
any negative energy will be dispelled.

10

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

6.

Bell Ringing

Hold a thought of goodness and clarity in your mind. Begin ringing a bell as you circle the room. The sound waves will carry your
thoughts to every part of the room. Finally, close the energies of
the room down by moving the bell in a huge circle or a figure eight
shape in the middle of the room. For those of you who practice
spiritual, psychic, or healing work, this is like closing your psychic
center at the end of a session.

About Yin and Yang
Yin and yang are complementary energies in Chinese philosophy. They are the
source of the Ch’i as it ﬂows through the
universe. The Taoist Tai Ch’i symbol, a
circle, creates a unity between the black
and white areas. Yin is dark and passive,
usually associated with the feminine and
receptivity, and yang is white, positive,
extrovert energy and usually associated
with the masculine. Within each section,
there is also the circle of its complementary energy, so in yin we
find yang and in yang we find yin. The symbol reveals that nothing
is ever totally yin or totally yang, but a combination of them both.
Yin’s qualities traditionally have been associated with water,
the moon, stillness, cold, and darkness, whereas yang relates to
the sun, fire, bright light, and movement.

M A K I N G A S TA RT

11

In the earliest Feng Shui schools, the environment was more
important than the home itself. Yin represented the north side
of a mountain, lakes, or shady places where not much sun was
found, while yang landscapes were south-facing slopes and
sunny places.
Mountains are usually yin and water is usually yang, because
water moves (unless it’s a still lake or pond; then it’s considered
yin).
In modern Feng Shui, assessing yin and yang energies is useful
for getting the general feel of the home. Is your home more yin or
more yang? Does it have lots of light or not enough? Traditionally
a home is considered to be more yin than yang. This is because
it is usually a place of calm, peace, and retreat from the world.
Nowadays many people work from home, so it’s important to
activate a more dynamic yang feel to the oﬃce or work area with
yang colors such as reds and orange and bright lights to balance
the yin feel of the home.
If you live in the countryside, there will be more receptive yin
energy around you, but if you live in a city center surrounded
by skyscrapers, in a town, or in the suburbs, then the environment will be highly charged with yang energy. If you live in a city,
you need to encourage more yin into your home by introducing
soft furnishings, fabric wall hangings, huge, comfy cushions, and
soft, earthy colors. You can also enhance yin with soft music and
lighting, but don’t negate all the yang energy. You need some in
the main living space for positive well-being, so yang items such
as glass dishes, metal ornaments, stone sculptures, and mirrors
can be included in the living or dining room. Keep yang items,

12

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

including electrical goods, televisions, stereos, and work-related
machines, out of the bedroom. Encourage positive yang energy
in the kitchen and the hallway by hanging wind chimes, using
bright lighting or electrical gadgets, or hanging metal objects on
the kitchen wall.
Harmonizing the two qualities of yin and yang throughout the
home will encourage the Ch’i to ﬂow more easily and can create happiness and good relationships in your life. These are the
basics of good Feng Shui, and they’ll get you off to a balanced
start .

M A K I N G A S TA RT

13

The
Bagua

2

A

part from yin and yang, there are two very important keys
to Feng Shui. One is called the “Bagua” and the other relates

to the five elements of Chinese astrology. The relationship that
connects the five elements, the Bagua and the direction of your
home is the key to harmony. First let’s look at the Bagua.
The Bagua is an instant map for finding out where to change

things for the better in your home. This ancient grid system (usually pronounced baagwa; also spelled Pa-Kua) represents the
invisible patterns of energy that are contained within anything
from a city block to a landscape, a house, a room, or even a bed.
By using this grid, we can see which areas need attention.
The Bagua is based on an ancient Chinese magic number
square, the Lo Shu. According to tradition, about four thousand
years ago, a tortoise emerged from a river. On its back were special markings, which were interpreted as being the numbers 1 to
9. When these numbers are placed in the magic square in the
proper formation, every row, whether horizontal, vertical, or diagonal, adds up to 15, and this mathematical “accident” supposedly
renders the magic square and its uses magical.

4

9

2

3

5

7

8

1

6

Lo Shu, the magic square.

16

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

S
SE

9

SW

4

Fire

2

Wood

E

3 Wood

Earth

5
CORE

Earth

Metal

7W

Metal

8

Water

6

NE

1

NW

N

Octagonal Bagua.

One reason this is an auspicious number is that 15 is the number
of days between the new moon and the full moon, which also
marks the twenty-four phases of the Chinese year. This highly
regarded time cycle was used in ancient traditional divination
methods to determine auspicious times to sow seeds, work on
gardens, or build houses.
When these same numbers are used to create the octagonal
shape of the Bagua, each of the numbers correlates to a keyword.
Note: The Bagua is based on the traditional feng shui Lo Shu. This
means that the south sector of the Bagua map is always at the
top of a layout, the north at the bottom. This is because the north
defines the front side of your home, even though your front door
may actually be located in a different directional sector.

THE BAGUA

17

The Nine Bagua Energies
The keywords listed below correspond to the nine energies or
pathways according to their compass points on the Bagua.
South:

Fire

Fame, success, acknowledgment

Southwest:

Earth

Marriage, love, romantic happiness

West:

Metal

Children, creativity

Northwest:

Metal

Communication, friends, mentors

North:

Water

Career, profession

Northeast:

Earth

Education, knowledge

East:

Wood

Family, well-being

Southeast:

Wood

Wealth, prosperity

Core:

Life energy

Most schools of Feng Shui use only the eight compass-point energies, but several use the center of the Bagua, which I’ve called the
core. This area is very important in the home because it represents
the heart of the home and the essence of you. When we enhance
this area of the home, we’re energizing our innermost selves.
We all have vitality and energy, and the Ch’i ﬂows through us

18

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

as it does around our homes. That’s why we need to remember
that when we’re working on areas in our home, we’re balancing
and empowering ourselves simultaneously.

How to Use the Bagua
The next thing to do is to line up the Bagua over a plan of your
home or just the room you’re trying to improve. By following
these easy steps, you can find out where the nine Bagua energies are located in your home. Start by deciding which areas of
your life you feel need improvement or development. Next, you
can apply simple Feng Shui enhancers to promote happiness, harmony, and well-being.
1.

Draw a rough plan of your home or room.

2.

Find the central point of the room or house. If it’s irregular,
square off the missing areas to make an imaginary regular
shape .

3.

Draw two diagonal lines from the corners. Where they cross
is the center of the space and corresponds to the core area
of the Bagua .

4.

Find out which direction your home faces so that you can
align your plan with the Bagua’s north, south, east, and west.
The easiest way to link the Bagua to your home is to use a

THE BAGUA

19

NORTH

kitchen

EAST

WEST

The Bagua over the plan of a home.

SOUTH

compass. Once you have found north, mark it on your drawing,
and then add east, west, and south in the appropriate spots. Next,
you can write in northeast, northwest, southeast, and southwest.
Even if you don’t have a compass, you can figure out which
direction your home faces by watching the sun and noting where
it rises (east) and where it sets (west). Mark these locations on
your home plan, and then you can align your Bagua to these
compass points.
Next, copy or trace a Bagua illustration onto tracing paper,
or photocopy it onto the kind of transparency you would use
on an overhead projector, and then place it over the plan of
your home. Make sure you match up the compass points on
your plan with the Bagua directions. For example, if your front
door is facing south, line up the south/fire/fame part of the
Bagua with the front door on your house plan. Then, obviously,

20

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

SOUTH

ENTRANCE

The Bagua over a house with a regular shape.

NORTH

SOUTH

The Bagua over a house with an irregular shape.

NORTH

THE BAGUA

21

the north/water/career area of the Bagua corresponds to the
home’s kitchen.

Missing Spaces and Projections
Some rooms and many homes don’t form simple rectangles or
squares, so you may have to contract or expand the Bagua to fit
unusually shaped homes or rooms, or houses with extensions. For
example, a house may have a missing space due to two extensions; this means that the west area of the Bagua, which relates

SOUTH

WEST

NORTH
A house where the extension has created a missing space. Here the Bagua area
west/children falls outside the house.

22

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

to creativity and children, falls outside the home.

Mapping Out Rooms
You can use the Bagua to map out an individual room in order to
enhance specific energies relevant to that room. For example, you
might want to create a more passionate or loving intimacy in the
bedroom, so placing specific enhancers in the southwest corner
(2) of the room (which corresponds to marriage, love, and romantic happiness) would be beneficial.
In the kitchen, you might want to create an atmosphere that
encourages great home cooking and good family conversations,
so placing specific enhancers in the east (3: family and well-being)
and northeast (8: education and knowledge) corners would be
beneficial.

THE BAGUA

23

The
Bagua
Sectors

3

T

he nine sectors of the Bagua relate to nine areas of your
house, and these in turn link with nine aspects of your life. If

an aspect of your life is making you unhappy, you’ll find out how
to link that aspect to a relevant sector of your house. You will then
find out how to make a start on changing things for the better.

Answer the Following Questions
1 .

Do you want to get ahead in your career or change it completely? If the answer is yes, reinforce the NORTH area.

2.

Do you want your talents to be noticed, or do you want to
have great success from one of your skills? If the answer is
yes, reinforce the SOUTH sector.

3.

Do you feel you have too many money problems or you just
want to be more prosperous? If the answer is yes, reinforce
the SOUTHEAST area.

4.

Do you want family relationships to work better, or do you
just want a general improved sense of well-being for yourself and all who live on the premises? If the answer is yes,
reinforce the EAST area.

5.

Are you keen to have children? Do you have creative urges
or want to create something new in your life? If so, reinforce
the WEST area.

6.

Do you want to meet the perfect partner or find new
romance? Do you want to improve your intimate love

26

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

4

9

2

5

3

7

8

1

6

relationship or find a better balance and harmony between
you and your lover? If so, reinforce the SOUTHWEST corner
of your home.
7.

Do you want to improve your mind? Do you seek wisdom
or want to explore spiritual or intellectual philosophies? Do
you want to pass an exam or achieve something in education? If so, reinforce the NORTHEAST corner of your home.

8.

Do you want to improve communication channels, make
new contacts, or boost your interactive skills? If so, reinforce
the NORTHWEST corner of your home.

9.

Do you want to know yourself better, begin to live out your
true potential, and feel at one with yourself? If so, enhance
the CORE of your home.

Find the area that you want to improve, but don’t try to do too
much at once; Feng Shui is about balancing energies, not overdoing one at the expense of others.

THE BAGUA SEcTORS

27

North: Career
Key element: The north sector of your home is reinforced by a
water enhancement.
To make your professional life work more smoothly or to promote beneficial energy in your career, use a simple water feature
such as images of fish, an aquarium, or a blue bowl.

Harmony in the North Sector
The north sector of your home probably has much less light than
the south, so it’s important to avoid drabness. Don’t use dark blue
and black, colors that are associated with the water element. Also,
it’s important not to overemphasize water, or you’ll find yourself
working day and night. If you have too great a water enhancement, your career might take precedence over every other aspect
of your life, a belief that can be detrimental to relationships.
Metal and wood elements are both compatible with water, so
you can introduce a little of both to balance the general atmosphere of this part of your home. A small feature of trickling
water over stones and some small upright plants is one possible
choice. Alternatively, brighten up the north sector of your home
with metal items, such as stainless steel objects, gold- or silverframed pictures, or a bowl of coins, all of which are highly auspicious for financial success in your career.
The bedroom is a special case, as you want to avoid anything
to do with commerce and careers in this area. Avoid medium or
dark blue colors if your bedroom is in the north of the home. The
bedroom should be a place of rest and calm, and blue can evoke
bad dreams and erratic sleep patterns.

28

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

South: Fame and Fortune
Key element: Using fire enhancements will reinforce the south
area of your home.
The south represents brightness and happiness, and it has a
summery, yang energy. It’s the sector of your home that, if harmonized, will bring everyone in the household external recognition and a sense of achievement. To boost your reputation and to
enhance your talents and chances for success, use a fire feature
in this part of your home, such as the color red, a photo of a red
sunrise, or any redbird imagery. Redbirds are highly auspicious in
Feng Shui.

Harmony in the South Sector
You probably get most natural light in the south of your home.
The corresponding color for the south direction is red, so you
don’t want to add more red here, or you may bring anger and
unsettled emotions into the home. To balance the spirited fiery
energy of this part of your home, use wood and earth objects
here. Too much fame can make you self-centered and intolerant,
so it’s important to incorporate earth and wood balancers such as
soft ochres and dusky desert yellows, along with antiques, plants,
and books. This combination will give you a far more realistic
sense of what fame and fortune mean to you, while still encouraging high self-esteem and achievement of personal goals without overinﬂating your sense of importance.

THE BAGUA SEcTORS

29

Southeast: Wealth and Prosperity
Key element: The southeast area of your home is reinforced using
wood enhancements.
Place images in greens and yellows here to promote a sense
of wealth and to improve your financial situation. To really give
this area a boost, place a money plant, also called a jade plant,
near a window.

Harmony in the Southeast Sector
The Chinese consider the southeast area of the home the most
important because it represents the family’s prosperity and longterm wealth. By balancing this area of the home you will encourage financial security for you and your family. Don’t overdo the
money plants and Chinese three-legged money-toad ornaments,
though, as too many cures can create havoc with your finances.
Alternatively, they may improve your prospects and increase your
wealth but generate other problems. Greed, financial manipulation, and envy are likely to take over if you get too obsessed
with boosting this area of your home. Note that a bathroom in
the southeast corner of your home can be detrimental to your
finances, as the positive energy will be constantly ﬂushed away. If
you have a bathroom in this area, it’s best to keep the toilet seat
down and the door shut when the room is not in use. To harmonize the southeast further, incorporate a fire (bright lighting and
red glass objects) and water (a small aquarium or images of fish)
cure .

30

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

East: Family and Well-Being
Key element: The eastern sector of your home is reinforced by
wood enhancements.
To improve the general health and well-being of your family
or to improve family relationships, place objects such as plants,
natural wooden objects, an ornamental jade tree, or a piece of
malachite in this part of the home.

Harmony in the East Sector
We all know that good health is the key to a happy life, so it’s
important to focus on balancing the energy of this area well. If
you have a missing east sector due to the shape of your home,
it’s imperative that you hang a mirror facing directly eastward
to encourage and reﬂect positive energy. Also use cures and
enhancements in the eastern corners of every room to reinforce
this missing area.
The Chinese believe good health is about the balance of yin
(cold) and yang (hot) energy in the body, while allowing the Ch’i
to ﬂow freely. In Feng Shui, it’s important to use wood cures in
tandem with water and fire to get the balance of energy right.
Plants are essential, but don’t fill your eastern sector with twenty
spider plants and expect to be as fit as a fiddle. Boost the east
with a water feature such as a painting or other images of ships,
waves, and waterfalls. The water or the image of water must be
active and in motion for this enhancement to be highly beneficial.
Avoid scenes of lakes and ponds, as they can create depressing
rather than vitalizing energy. Replace any withered plants immediately. If you have no room for potted plants, then incorporate

THE BAGUA SEcTORS

31

a painting of a vase of ﬂowers or peaches (a Chinese symbol of
longevity).

West: Children and Creativity
Key element: The west sector of your home is reinforced with
metal enhancements.
To promote creativity and fertility, whether your goal is to
create children of the mind, soul, or body, place a set of wind
chimes, a brass bell, or a white, gold, or silver image in this part
of your home.

Harmony in the West Sector
We all want to have happy, healthy children, and by activating and
balancing the west part of your home, you will create a harmonious family life and boost the psyches and development of your
children. This is also an important area for your own creativity and
fertility. Like anything in Feng Shui, however, if you use too much
metal enhancement you’ll end up with obstinate, uncontrollable
children with academic problems. You might also find that too
much metal enhancement affects your fertility if you’re hoping
to have children, or that your creative juices stop ﬂowing when
you’re trying to finish writing that novel. To reinforce good energy
here, incorporate earth and water cures to bring balance to the
area. A good earth booster for this part of your home is a piece of
pink tourmaline or rose quartz crystal. To motivate a child, place
a piece of amethyst crystal in the child’s work area. Introduce
ceramic, glassware, or objets d’art. Fill a basket or jar with pebbles
or shells from the beach.

32

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

Southwest: Relationships and Love
Key element: The southwest area of your home is reinforced
using earth enhancements.
To enhance love, bring new romance, or make relationships
more enduring, use pairs of real ﬂowers (fresh ones are best), an
illustration of a pair of lovebirds or mandarin ducks, or figurines
of couples (but not all of these at once!). A piece of rose quartz
crystal helps generate tolerance and understanding.

Harmony in the Southwest Sector
The southwest corner of your home is usually bright and well lit
by natural light. This is a crucial area to work on if you want harmonious love relationships or new romance. It doesn’t help to balance the area if you cram it with endless photos of you and your
partner. It also doesn’t help the situation if you put lots of pictures
of you on your own or keep a hoard of old letters, mementos,
or souvenirs from past love affairs in this area. Too much earth
enhancement in the southwest area will swamp you with love
problems rather than create harmony, so you should incorporate
several fire and metal cures to balance the more self-indulgent
aspects of earth with passion and integrity. Incorporate a piece of
metal furniture or gilt picture frames to add metal.
If the southwest area is your bedroom, don’t hang mirrors that
reﬂect the bed, as this distorts physical desire and also causes
bad sleeping patterns. Introduce some fire by adding shades of
red to the fabrics or décor; for a metal enhancement, choose a
brass or wrought-iron bedstead.

THE BAGUA SEcTORS

33

Northeast: Education and Knowledge
Key element: The northeast area of your home is reinforced using
earth enhancements.
To improve self-wisdom, pass school exams, or help with educational issues, fill a bowl with small stones or pebbles and place
it on a ledge or table. Use soft ochre colors, or place images of
harvests, autumn, or a favorite landscape on the walls.

Harmony in the Northeast Sector
To maintain the balance in this part of your home, it’s essential that you place fire cures here. Too much earth enhancement can make family members show off their knowledge and
believe they know best or use their educational achievements as
power-tripping or manipulative tools. To activate a good sense of
achievement and educational success, use red in your décor or
hang up a gilt-framed mirror. If this area falls in your study, then
it’s doubly auspicious, but you need to balance this high-powered
energy with a metal cure, too. For example, line drawings, etchings, or engravings on the wall promote good metal energy. In
the northeast corner of the room in which you study, place an
amethyst crystal to boost the power of the mind.

34

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

Northwest: Communication, Friends,
Mentors
Key element: The northwest area of your home is reinforced
using metal enhancements.
To improve your relationships with friends, colleagues, and
mentors and to open the communication channels for new contacts or beneficial advice, use the color white, or place silverthreaded cushions or wind chimes in this area.

Harmony in the Northwest Sector
This sector of your home is revered above all the others in traditional Feng Shui. The Chinese considered this to be an area associated with good luck. “Mentor luck,” as they call it, forms the key
to success and good fortune. Having a mentor was regarded as
the pathway to power and ultimate happiness. To attract this kind
of luck and cultivate mentors (or simply people who can get you
where you want to be), you must balance this area really well. If
you place too heavy an emphasis on metal cures, however, your
networking system will be overloaded with “unlucky” mentors. In
other words, you may become desperate to meet the right contact and end up listening to everyone you meet. Alternatively, you
may scare off the real mentors rather than drawing them to you.
The addition of earth cures will give you every opportunity for
good communication and networking. Incorporate natural crystals or ceramic ornaments, and use earth colors such as ochres
and yellows in your soft furnishings or décor to complement
white walls.

THE BAGUA SEcTORS

35

Center: The Core
Key element: For the core area, there is no ruling element, so use
a combination of all the elements.
Choose one enhancement from each of the elements to
enhance self-love and personal growth.
If the core area falls in a part of your house where several
walls meet, as is often the case, use images on the walls rather
than trying to place objects in awkward positions. If the core area
falls in the middle of a room or in a hallway, then use the cures on
the nearest table, ledge, or wall.

For example:
To add wood:
Choose a favorite upright plant or a vibrant landscape image.

To add ﬁre:
Place a mirror on the wall facing good light.

To add water:
Place a piece of aquamarine on a shelf or opt for an image of
ﬂowing water.

To add metal:
Place a piece of black obsidian on a low ledge, or coins in a metal
cup .

To add earth:
Put a large conch shell on a table, hang a small tapestry, or incorporate soft browns and ochres into your décor.

36

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

A wide variety of decorative objects can be used to represent the elements. Find
the ones that resonate with your style and your own personal aesthetic.

The more you look into Chinese systems, the more you will
discover certain areas of logic that are hard for many people in
the West to understand. For example, you’ll come upon a Bagua
design that makes little sense because it shows one wood, fire,
metal, and water sector and three earth sectors that are somewhat weirdly displayed. If you look into other systems, you will
discover that the seasons of the year have extra earth months
tucked between them. For the time being, we have to accept that
there are reasons for this, and look more deeply into these things
some other time.

THE BAGUA SEcTORS

37

The
Five
Elements

4

M

ost people know there are twelve animal signs in Chinese
astrology: the Rat, Ox, Tiger, Rabbit, Dragon, Snake, Horse,

Sheep, Monkey, Rooster, Dog and Boar.

Chinese astrological animals.

There are also five elements, corresponding to different energies in Chinese astrology and Feng Shui. These five elements are
used to figure out anything from your birth chart to the siting of
a house. At this point we’ve discussed using these elements and
their associated cures to boost and harmonize the energy of each
aspiration of the Bagua and its corresponding area in the home.
These five elements represent the kind of Ch’i that exists
throughout the environment and that works in tandem with the
yin and yang qualities and the Bagua energies. As I suggested in
the previous chapter, you should use fire cures in the south area

40

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

of your house because that is where the fire energy is naturally at
home. Each of the five elements corresponds to one of the areas
of the Bagua. This elemental system is based on the Chinese
cycle of creation and destruction.
According to the Chinese creation cycle, wood can be burned
to create fire. Fire burns down to ashes, which create earth.
Metal is created within the earth, which creates water, which
allows trees to grow and thus creates wood.

Creation cycle.

Fire

Wood

Earth

Water

Metal

Quick List
Wood creates fire, fire creates earth, earth creates metal, metal
creates water, and water creates wood.

THE FIVE ElEMENTS

41

According to the Chinese destruction cycle, wood uses earth
to grow, and earth pollutes water. Water douses fire, and fire
melts metal, but metal can cut and destroy wood.

Destruction cycle.

Fire

Wood

Earth

Water

Metal

Quick List
Wood destroys earth, earth destroys water, water destroys fire,
fire destroys metal, and metal destroys wood. So, for example, because metal destroys wood, metal and wood are not
compatible.

42

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

When we use cures or enhancements in the home, they have
to be compatible with the element that we are treating. For
example, if we are working on a wood area, we reinforce it with
water cures because water encourages the wood energy, but we
wouldn’t use water cures to reinforce a fire area, as this would
only put out the ﬂames!

Fire
Wood

Earth

SW

E

W

NE
Earth

Earth

S

N

Metal

NW

Professional

SE
Health

r
re
tu
ur
N

Fi
na
nc
ie
r

Celebrity

Metal

r
he
ac
Te

N
et
w
or
ke
r

Water

Freelancer
The Bagua, too, is part of this process, and the illustration of the compass shows
how all these elements, compass points, and signs interact and work together.

The five elements form a cycle of energy that needs to be harmonized in your environment. For example, if you want to boost
the fire sector of your home, you can draw on the other two elements that complement fire, wood and earth. Just don’t overload

THE FIVE ElEMENTS

43

the areas of the home where the energy is naturally resonating
with that element. In other words, don’t overload the fire corner
of your home with too many fire cures; add a little wood and
earth to complement and boost the natural fire energy instead.

Elements That Complement Each Other
• Fire can benefit from wood and earth cures.
• Earth can benefit from metal and fire cures.
• Metal can benefit from water and earth cures.
• Water can benefit from wood and metal cures.
• Wood can benefit from fire and water cures.

The Elements and Their Cures
The following sections describe how you can use the elements to
cure an area of your home that needs to be brought into balance.

The Element of Fire
Here are some examples of fire cures:
• Red or orange paint
• Red light bulbs (for the brave)
• A picture of a phoenix
• Mirrors
• Candles
• Incense
• Real fires
• Prisms

44

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

• Bells
• Spices
• Cacti
• Fireworks images
• Illustrations of battleships
• Illustrations of bonfires
• Red glassware

The Element of Wood
Here are some examples of wood cures:
• Books
• Plants
• Wooden sculpture
• Green things
• Herbs
• Sage
• Pictures of spring meadows
• Olive green
• Gnarled wood
• Oil paintings
• Grasses
• Dried seedpods
• Origami
• Ladders
• Vegetables

THE FIVE ElEMENTS

45

The Element of Earth
Here are some examples of earth cures:
• Stones
• Pebbles
• Rock crystal
• Yellow objects
• Brown items
• Terra cotta colors
• Antiques
• Shells
• Fossils
• Sponges
• Loofahs
• Glass ornaments and jars
• Tapestries
• Soap
• Coffee

The Element of Water
Here are some examples of water cures:
• Fish tank
• Dark blue and black items
• Music
• Illustrations of rivers
• Stones and rocks from the sea
• Coral
• The colors violet and purple

46

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

• Sea paintings
• Pictures of pirates
• Illustrations of shipwrecks
• Pictures of ships
• Pictures of boats
• Images of cliffs and waves
• Amber

The Element of Metal
Here are some examples of metal cures:
• Gold leaf
• Gold paint
• Silver
• Stainless steel
• Wrought iron
• White metal objects
• Photography, black-and-white images
• Gilt frames
• Brass rubbings
• Silver threads
• Gold-colored fabric
• White lilies

THE FIVE ElEMENTS

47

Kua Number:
Your Personal
Best Direction

5

N

ow that you know how the elements, Bagua, and yin and
yang all work together to balance and harmonize the energy

of your home, you also need to discover your own most auspicious direction; this is done by determining your kua number. This

number is your lucky number in Chinese astrology. It tells you
which of the eight Bagua compass points is right for you. This
is the direction you should face when doing certain things, like
sleeping, studying, and even eating.

For Those Born Around the Chinese New Year
If you were born between January 1 and February 20, check
the Chinese Lunar Calendar to see what date the Chinese New
Year fell on in the year of your birth. If you were born before the
Chinese New Year, you must subtract one from the year of your
birth. For example, if you were born on January 23, 1971 (the
Chinese New Year in 1971 fell on January 27), you would count
your birth year as 1970.
Pages 51–53 are the steps to calculating your kua number.

50

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

Dates of the Chinese New Year
January 30, 1930

February 8, 1959

February 17, 1988

February 17, 1931

January 28, 1960

February 6, 1989

February 6, 1932

February 15, 1961

January 27, 1990

January 26, 1933

February 5, 1962

February 15, 1991

February 14, 1934

January 25, 1963

February 4, 1992

February 4, 1935

February 13, 1964

January 23, 1993

January 24, 1936

February 2, 1965

February 10, 1994

February 11, 1937

January 21, 1966

January 31, 1995

January 31, 1938

February 9, 1967

February 19, 1996

February 19, 1939

January 30, 1968

February 7, 1997

February 8, 1940

February 17, 1969

January 28, 1998

January 27, 1941

February 6, 1970

February 16, 1999

February 15, 1942

January 27, 1971

February 5, 2000

February 5, 1943

February 15, 1972

January 24, 2001

January 25, 1944

February 3, 1973

February 12, 2002

February 13, 1945

January 23, 1974

February 1, 2003

February 2, 1946

February 11, 1975

January 21, 2004

January 22, 1947

January 31, 1976

February 9, 2005

February 10, 1948

February 18, 1977

January 29, 2006

January 29, 1949

February 7, 1978

February 18, 2007

February 17, 1950

January 28, 1979

February 7, 2008

February 6, 1951

February 16, 1980

January 26, 2009

January 27, 1952

February 5, 1981

February 17, 2010

February 14, 1953

January 25, 1982

February 3, 2011

February 3, 1954

February 13, 1983

January 23, 2012

January 24, 1955

February 2, 1984

February 10, 2013

February 12, 1956

February 20, 1985

January 31, 2014

January 31, 1957

February 9, 1986

February 19, 2015

February 18, 1958

January 29, 1987

KUA NUMBER: YOUR PERSONAl BEST DIREcTION

51

The Calculation
1.

Take the last two digits of your birth year and add them
together. For example, if you were born in 1970, then you’d
add 7 and 0, to equal 7. If the result is greater than 9, add the
two digits together to get a final result of a single digit.

2.

If you’re female, add 5 to the number that you have produced. For example,
5 + 7 = 12.

3.

If you’re male, subtract your answer from 10. For example,
10 - 7 = 3.

4.

If the number you end up with is greater than 9 (as in the
female example, above) add the two digits together and
reduce them to one digit. For example,
1 + 2 = 3.

5.

If the answer is 5 and you are male, your most auspicious
direction is the same as it is for number 2.

6.

If the answer is 5 and you are female, your most auspicious
direction is the same as for number 8.

52

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

Example 1
1.

Warren was born on January 17, 1984.

2.

The Chinese New Year was February 2 in that year, so he has
to move his year of birth back to 1983.

3.

He adds the last two digits of his year together:
8 + 3 = 11.

4.

He must now reduce this to one number:
1 + 1 = 2.

5.

He now takes 2 away from 10:
10 - 2 = 8.

6.

Warren’s kua number is 8.

Example 2
1.

Darcy was born on September 28, 1987.

2.

She must add the last two digits of her year together:
8 + 7 = 15.

3.

She must now reduce this to one number:
1 + 5 = 6.

4.

She must now add 5 to the number:
5 + 6 = 11.

5.

She must now reduce this to one number:
1 + 1 = 2.

6.

Darcy’s kua number is 2.

KUA NUMBER: YOUR PERSONAl BEST DIREcTION

53

Kua Best Directions
If your Kua number is:

Your auspicious direction is:

1

Southeast

2

Northeast

3

South

4

North

5

(Male) Northeast
(Female) Southwest

6

West

7

Northwest

8

Southwest

9

East

Although the Bagua locations of your home are fixed, it is useful to know the best direction for you to face when working, sitting for long periods of time, eating, and sleeping. So if your best
direction is east, try to have the headboard of your bed facing
east. When relaxing in your living space, eating in a restaurant, or
signing an important document, try to sit facing east. Your best
direction reinforces your personal energy and is highly auspicious
for balancing the other energies in the environment.

54

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

When relaxing in your living space, try to sit facing east.

KUA NUMBER: YOUR PERSONAl BEST DIREcTION

55

The
Environment

6

A

part from the inside of the home, in traditional Feng Shui,
the outside—particularly the sector in front of your main

entrance—is very important. This area is called the “redbird,” and
it is highly auspicious .
First of all, is your house, room, or apartment at the end of a

cul-de-sac?

House
cul-de-sac

A house at the end of a cul-de-sac is in an inauspicious position. You should instigate a cure.

Second, do you have a road, street, or path pointing directly
toward your home? You might live in an apartment at the end of
a corridor or your house might be positioned on a sharp bend
of a road. The energy directed straight down the road toward
you is highly inauspicious. Energy that can come toward you in a
straight line is called a “secret arrow,” and secret arrows are best
kept away from your home.

58

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

House

secret
arrows

secret
arrows

converging roads

This house is also vulnerable to secret-arrow energy.

The cures for secret-arrow energy are simple. Place wind
chimes in front of the main entrance, put plants at either side
of your doorway to create spirals of Ch’i, or if you have enough
room, put a small fountain or trickling water feature near the front
entrance. All these cures generate a good ﬂow of positive Ch’i.

Gardens
• If you have a garden, is it in good shape?
• Is it tidy and clear of trash, or is it overgrown and messy?
• Does the path meander to the front door, or does it come
straight off the road via steps?

THE ENVIRONMENT

59

Most people who live in an urban area have straight paths. A simple remedy is to hang baskets of ﬂowers or to place standing pots
of plants on either side of the entrance. Clear away any trash. If
you’re always putting off the cleaning up, an interesting point to
ponder is whether you could also be making excuses about cleaning up your own life.

Garden Dos and Don’ts
The art of good Feng Shui in the garden is to ensure that everything ﬂows and meanders. Straight paths, rigid or formal geometrical beds of ﬂowers, and lifeless empty patios and terraces
don’t generate good Ch’i. Foliage plants are yin, while big stones
and boulders are yang. Both can be incorporated into a garden,
but they should always be in balance with each other. You can
introduce curvy lines and patterns by using subtly different colors
or types of plants.
Think carefully about your fences and walls. Sometimes high
fences make good screens against secret arrows. If you can see
telegraph poles or groups of towers from your home, then add
trelliswork or grow a vine across the terrace to block off and
deﬂect the secret-arrow energy away from your home.
A meandering stream provides very beneficial energy; ponds
can be set into a small garden as well, but you must ensure that
the water doesn’t stagnate, so add a fountain in the center or
some kind of water feature to keep the pond ﬂowing. Flowing
water collects and disperses Ch’i. If you opt for a pond, introduce
some fish; the best combination is said to be eight red or golden
fish plus one black fish to balance the others. Never have an even

60

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

number of fish; that is considered inauspicious. While ﬂowing
water is nice, it can be impractical in small gardens and tiny city
spaces, but curvy paths and edging around lawns can take their
place .
If you don’t have a garden and you live in an apartment at
the end of a long corridor, hang wind chimes outside your door.
Alternatively, hang a Bagua mirror (an octagonal mirror found in
most New Age shops) on the outside of the door, with the mirror
facing out.

THE ENVIRONMENT

61

You can also apply the Bagua system to the garden, just as
you do to the home. Draw a plan of your garden, place the Bagua
drawing over the garden, and align the directions so that north
on the drawing lines up with north on the Bagua.
For example, to make the most of your love life, boost the
southwest corner of your garden with climbing red roses or a
yang feature such as a garden sculpture.

Is Your House an East or West Home?
According to Feng Shui, there are two types of houses and similarly two groups of people who are known as the east and west
groups. Following is a quick way of determining which is the overall best direction for your house to face. This is most useful to
know if you are thinking of building your own house or if you are
moving somewhere new. If you choose a house that is basically
aligned in the same direction as your group, then obviously you
will benefit from that aﬃnity. However, if you live with several
members of a family or if you have a partner, there may be conﬂicting directions.
East-group people feel more comfortable in east-group
houses, and west-group people feel more comfortable in westgroup houses .
Whether you are east group or west group depends on your
kua number, as shown on page 63.

62

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

Kua Number Group
1. East
2. West
3. East
4. East
5. (Male) West, (Female) West
6. West
7. West
8. West
9. East

• Homes are classed as east houses if their front doors face
southeast, northeast, southwest, or east.
• Homes are classed as west houses if their front doors face
north, south, west or northwest.
What we are trying to discover here is whether the house is in a
good direction generally for you. If one of your family is east and
everyone else is west, then the people most compatible with the
house will get the most benefit from the Feng Shui cures. But
that doesn’t mean the odd one out is going to have problems; all
you need to do is to reinforce his or her own element in the room
where he or she sleeps.

THE ENVIRONMENT

63

Harmonizing
Ch’i in the
Home

7

B

y now you have decluttered your home, done some space
clearing, checked the outside of your house, and found the

Bagua sectors that relate to the different areas of your home. You
might also have already added some cures to reinforce specific
themes in your life. Next you need to attend to the whole of the
home by maximizing the harmonious energy of each room.

The Front Door
The front door is one of the most important places to work with,
simply because this is the main entrance for the Ch’i to come into
your home. Ideally, the front door should face the favorable direction of the person who is the head of the household. Favorable
directions can be found according to your kua number. If the front
door doesn’t face this direction, don’t panic. The most important
thing is to check the energy or inﬂuences that are outside the
home. For example, if secret-arrow energy is pointing at the
entrance to your home, hang a Bagua mirror on the front door to
deﬂect the diﬃcult energy.

A Bagua mirror

66

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

Examples of Bad Front-Door Directions
• A straight path and large tree threaten the home.
• A satellite dish opposite the home generates secret arrow
energy.
• High-rise buildings distribute negative energy in your
direction.

Examples of Good Front-Door Directions
• A small water feature near the front door is beneficial.
• A curved path is better than a straight one.
• A low wall or hedge helps circulate Ch’i.

HARMONIZING cH’I IN THE HOME

67

Entrances
What is your entrance like? Do you have a front hall, or does
the front entrance lead straight into the living area? Wherever
the first step across the threshold of your home leads, you must
always keep the entrance clear and uncluttered. Make sure shoes,
coats, books, papers, knickknacks, and letters don’t pile up on a
hall table. This type of clutter creates stagnant yin energy. If you
have space, place a jar or vase of ﬂowers near the entrance to
encourage positive, earthy energy to enter the home.

Don’t let clutter accumulate in the entrance area.

If you can walk through your main entrance and see the back
door straight ahead of you, it’s important to introduce some
plants or wind chimes in the entrance hall to soften the ﬂow of
energy. Otherwise, the Ch’i will just ﬂow straight through the
house, in one door and out the other. A long corridor is also a
very inviting place for secret-arrow energy. Hang a large crystal
over the doorway to deﬂect the straight lines of negative energy.

68

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

The Kitchen
In traditional Feng Shui, you should never have fire and water
together, as they are opposite energies. This can pose a problem
in a small kitchen, where the sink is often next to the oven.
Hot ovens = fire; running taps = water.
There’s not much you can do to separate them if you have a
fitted kitchen. If your oven and sink are close together, the remedy is to place a wood cure either above or between these two
diﬃcult energies to harmonize them and bridge the gap between
the creative cycle of “water creates wood; wood creates fire.”
This cure could be something like a small plant on a shelf or a
wooden spoon hanging on the wall.
According to ancient Chinese philosophy, the kitchen is
one of the most creative areas of the home. This is where life
is energized, where food is cooked and the process of creating
and blending ingredients is like Feng Shui itself. Most of us can’t
get excited by day-to-day cooking or shoving a supermarket dinner into the microwave. (By the way, microwaves invoke highly
charged yang energy and are worth avoiding if you can.)
Check the state of your kitchen now. If it’s full of dirty dishes,
clean it up, and if there is stale food in the fridge, throw it out.
If you’re hoping for an improvement in your love life or life in
general, then the sooner you create the right ambience in the
kitchen, which is the heart of the home according to the Chinese,
the sooner your own heart will be harmonized.
Here are some harmonizing tips for a healthy and creative
kitchen and for sustaining happy relationships.

HARMONIZING cH’I IN THE HOME

69

Tips
Ovens should face the strongest source of natural light. The
Chinese believe that bad energy comes from the north, so it’s
better for the source of all nourishment—the oven and cooking
process itself—to face south. If you can’t move your oven around,
then hang a mirror directly opposite the oven to reﬂect and maximize natural light. Alternatively, hang a white quartz crystal in the
window to reﬂect bright light all around the room. Just be careful
that it isn’t likely to direct light onto something that will catch fire.
Is your stove directly opposite the back door? If it is, you
might have to move it at some stage. The Chinese always placed
their stoves so they could see the back door when they were
cooking, and the same goes for any item of furniture such as a
bed, sofa, or easy chair, where you might be standing or sitting or
lying down. Don’t turn your back on a door, because the secret
arrows of negative Ch’i will be drawn to your exposed back. In

This kitchen is designed to maximize natural light.

70

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

more primitive times, it was believed that
someone could creep up on you and hurt
you while you were cooking or resting.
White is the favorite color for Chinese
kitchens because it symbolizes purity
and promotes good health. Don’t store
cutlery in a stagnant area, such as in a
corner cupboard or at the bottom of a
cupboard, and make sure your knives and
forks are in a drawer near an entrance,

A poor kitchen arrangement: a stove is
best positioned somewhere other than
directly opposite the back door.

doorway, or window for positive energy
to ﬂow. Finally, a bathroom near a kitchen
produces negative energy, so keep the door closed and the toilet
lid down.

The Bathroom
Bathrooms and toilets are generally big sources of trouble in
Feng Shui. It might not look like it, but you can easily lose your
money or your partner if you’re not careful. Seriously, this is one
room where you can’t make major changes without calling in the
plumber, so if you think your good energy is being ﬂushed away,
make the following adjustments.
As mentioned earlier, always keep the toilet seat down and
close the door. Don’t put trailing plants on top of the toilet tank
or on the ﬂoor; this attracts energy downward toward the outﬂow of water. As bathrooms are very much water areas, even if
yours does not fall in the water or north sector of the Bagua, you
must harmonize this room with wood and metal cures. For example, hang an image of trees or a wild landscape in the bathroom.

HARMONIZING cH’I IN THE HOME

71

Use stainless steel towel bars or bathroom fittings. Avoid candles in the bathroom. However romantic they seem, the tension
between fire energy and water energy can cause problems in
your relationships. Soft greens and neutral colors such as soapstone whites and sandstone are excellent wall colors. Choose a
white bathroom suite, if you can. If you’re stuck with something
out of date and unfashionable, add dashes of these colors in your
bathroom accessories and towels.

The Bedroom
The bedroom is highly auspicious for intimate relationships and
personal psychic energy, which is restored during a good night’s
sleep. For obvious reasons, the bed is a potent place for sexual
relationships, but it’s also where you sleep, dream, and wake up.

What could be a harmonious arrangement is disturbed by hanging lights directly
over the bed. This introduces too much intense yang energy directly onto the
bodies below.

72

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

The end of the bed pointing toward the door (left) is inauspicious. The placement on the
right is a good ﬁx.

If your bed is in a bad spot according to the Feng Shui tradition,
then you’re going to have diﬃcult sleep patterns and problems in
your sex life, too.
First, does the foot of the bed point straight toward the doorway? If it does, you are better off moving it to face a different
direction, unless of course the head of the bed is located in your
personal best direction, in which case hang a small mirror facing the doorway, perhaps on the end of the bed, to deﬂect any
secret-arrow energy coming straight at you. Many people are
superstitious about having the bed facing the doorway because
secret arrows of maleficent energy can swoop through your door
and blaze their way across the bed, leading to a broken relationship as well as broken sleep. Others are superstitious because in
days gone by (and probably still today) those who died in their
beds were carried out feet first through the doorway.
Check the beams or joists over your bedroom. Are you sleeping directly under a heavy beam that runs over the bed? If you

HARMONIZING cH’I IN THE HOME

73

are, try to move the bed somewhere else. These kinds of “enemy
lines” can destroy your sex life, your sleep, and your psychic
energy. If you can’t move the bed or it just ends up under another
beam, be cunning. Choose bed covers or duvets that have strong
patterns of lines positioned at right angles to the beams or joists.
This will take the energy along the new lines and off the end or
sides of the bed, deﬂecting and balancing the negative Ch’i.
Avoid hanging lights directly over the bed. This highly focused
yang energy will beam down directly on whichever part of your
body the light is above. This can create aches and pains as well
as an erratic sex life and sleep pattern. Move the bed or move
the light .
Energize and harmonize your bedroom (whether it is in the
relationship, or southwest, sector of the Bagua or not) with some
metal or fire cures. Place two red candles or red glassware in the
bedroom to maximize sexual harmony. A glass pyramid or prism
can be an excellent vitalizer if you’re single and looking for a partner, or if you want more romance between you and your partner.
The power of the pyramid or prism is that, although it has sharp,
faceted sides, it directs and attracts energy that may be ﬂowing
unevenly. Hang wind chimes outside the window and use mirrors
with care. Never hang a mirror facing you when you’re in bed;
this causes problems with self-value and sexuality.
Finally, it is strongly recommended that you don’t sleep above
an empty space such as a garage, storeroom, or empty basement.
This is because there will be stagnant Ch’i underneath you, which
acts as a depressant rather than a stimulant.

74

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

The Home Oﬃce
Traditionalists believe that the best place to have a study or oﬃce
is in the northwest area of your home, as this sector encourages
good contacts, interaction, and lucky breaks. If you can’t manage
to locate your workplace here, however, strategically place some
metal and earth cures around the place you work or study. Metal
cures include stainless steel oﬃce accessories, hollow-metal
wind chimes, or a landscape painting. Earth cures include natural
objects such as a bowl of stones or shells; put fresh ﬂowers in the
east corner of the study or oﬃce space for yang energy, and position a small plant in the southeast of the study or oﬃce space to
enhance your prospects. Use a white quartz crystal on your desk’s
southwest corner to improve business relationships.
If you can place your desk so it’s facing your best personal
direction, so much the better, and leave the area in front of your

Keep your oﬃce space as uncluttered as possible.

HARMONIZING cH’I IN THE HOME

75

desk free of clutter. Try to ensure that you can see the door from
the desk, rather than having your back to it. Having your back to
the door is not only inauspicious, but can actually make you feel
uncomfortable. The arrangement that I have suggested allows the
Ch’i to circulate and create a sense of welcome into your space.
Keep your space as free of clutter as possible. Put files and
books away rather than leaving them lying all over the desk or
ﬂoor. Clutter like this creates too much yin energy and stagnant
Ch’i. If you have lots of sharp furniture edges, from chairs and
tables to desks and filing cabinets, add more earth cures such
as wall paints in terra cotta or yellow ochre, leather chairs, or a
tapestry on the wall.

The Dining Area
Use soft colors and lighting in the dining area. The ideal shape for
a table is an octagon, but not many people find this practical or,
for that matter, easy to find. The next best thing is a round table
because that shape symbolizes creativity and completion. If you
have a square or rectangular table, use circular place mats or place
a round bowl of fruit in the center of the table to compensate for
the square shape and to add balance. A mirror on the wall that
reﬂects the abundance of food on the table will also reﬂect the
abundance you will have in your life.
Ensure that chairs and tables don’t obstruct doorways, and
always have an even number of chairs set out. Even if you’re
expecting only three people, set out four chairs because even
numbers are more balancing than uneven numbers.

76

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

A good dining room arrangement: note the even number of chairs
around the table.

HARMONIZING cH’I IN THE HOME

77

The Living Room
The living room is probably the place in which you spend most
of your time, apart from the bedroom or the kitchen. It is often
the most important room in the home because it’s where we
“show off” who we are. We invite strangers into this part of the
home, and it really does expose who we actually are. First impressions last a long time, and some impressions can be negative. For
instance, you have probably had the experience of feeling uncomfortable in other people’s living spaces because they have very
different lifestyles and needs from yours. It is quite possible for
others to feel uncomfortable in your living area, so try to remain
objective about it. A living area is exactly what it says it is. It lives
and breathes a message of who you are and is the essence of your
personality.

A good placement for the sofa, facing a window.

78

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

Always have sofas facing a window or doorway. Don’t have
any seats with their backs facing a door unless you really can’t
help it. If you can’t face or see a doorway from a seating area,
hang a mirror so you can see the door when you are seated. Keep
the center of the living room empty so that friends and strangers
alike can move through this space without disrupting the energy
ﬂow that circulates around the room.
Furniture should include curves and soft furnishings. Choose
warm and welcoming colors, such as soft pastels, sage greens,
apricots, or palest pink. Always keep a piece of white quartz
crystal in the south sector of the living room to enhance other
people’s appreciation of and respect for your personal style and
taste. This is the room where you will create success in your life,
even if it isn’t in the south area of your home. If you don’t have an
open fire or even a false fire or hearth, place four large candles in
a special place to create an alternate type of fire centerpiece for
your home. This is highly beneficial energy in the living room to
promote success in all you do.

HARMONIZING cH’I IN THE HOME

79

Your
Elemental
Energy Type

8

I

n Chinese astrology and in Feng Shui, the five elements are
reﬂective of the energies within us as individuals. Harmonious

relationships depend on activating your own personal element
within the environment, so the cures you should use are usually
ones that balance or enhance the energies that may be missing.
Using too much of your own element will create problems, however, so you must boost your own element subtly.
While each new year brings in a new animal sign, each element runs for two years at a time, so we can have Wood/ Rat
followed by Wood/Ox, then Fire/Tiger followed by Fire/Rabbit.
Over the course of sixty years, each element will link with each
sign, and then the whole sequence begins again. Consult the list
on the following pages to discover your birth element.

82

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

Elemental Birth Years
Year

Element

January 30, 1930 – February 16, 1931

Metal, yang

February 17, 1931 – February 5, 1932

Metal, yin

February 6, 1932 – January 25, 1933

Water, yang

January 26, 1933 – February 13, 1934

Water, yin

February 14, 1934 – February 3, 1935

Wood, yang

February 4, 1935 – January 23, 1936

Wood, yin

January 24, 1936 – February 10, 1937

Fire, yang

February 11, 1937 – January 30, 1938

Fire, yin

January 31, 1938 – February 18, 1939

Earth, yang

February 19, 1939 – February 7, 1940

Earth, yin

February 8, 1940 – January 26, 1941

Metal, yang

January 27, 1941 – February 14, 1942

Metal, yin

February 15, 1942 – February 4, 1943

Water, yang

February 5, 1943 – January 24, 1944

Water, yin

January 25, 1944 – February 12, 1945

Wood, yang

February 13, 1945 – February 1, 1946

Wood, yin

February 2, 1946 – January 21, 1947

Fire, yang

January 22, 1947 – February 9, 1948

Fire, yin

February 10, 1948 – January 28, 1949

Earth, yang

January 29, 1949 – February 16, 1950

Earth, yin

February 17, 1950 – February 5, 1951

Metal, yang

February 6, 1951 – January 26, 1952

Metal, yin

January 27, 1952 – February 13, 1953

Water, yang

February 14, 1953 – February 2, 1954

Water, yin

February 3, 1954 – January 23, 1955

Wood, yang

January 24, 1955 – February 11, 1956

Wood, yin

February 12, 1956 – January 30, 1957

Fire, yang

January 31, 1957 – February 17, 1958

Fire, yin

February 18, 1958 – February 7, 1959

Earth, yang

YO U R E l E M E N TA l E N E RGY T Y P E

83

84

February 8, 1959 – January 27, 1960

Earth, yin

January 28, 1960 – February 14, 1961

Metal, yang

February 15, 1961 – February 4, 1962

Metal, yin

February 5, 1962 – January 24, 1963

Water, yang

January 25, 1963 – February 12, 1964

Water, yin

February 13, 1964 – February 1, 1965

Wood, yang

February 2, 1965 – January 20, 1966

Wood, yin

January 21, 1966 – February 8, 1967

Fire, yang

February 9, 1967 – January 29, 1968

Fire, yin

January 30, 1968 – February 16, 1969

Earth, yang

February 17, 1969 – February 5, 1970

Earth, yin

February 6, 1970 – January 26, 1971

Metal, yang

January 27, 1971 – February 14, 1972

Metal, yin

February 15, 1972 – February 2, 1973

Water, yang

February 3, 1973 – January 22, 1974

Water, yin

January 23, 1974 – February 10, 1975

Wood, yang

February 11, 1975 – January 30, 1976

Wood, yin

January 31, 1976 – February 17, 1977

Fire, yang

February 18, 1977 – February 6, 1978

Fire, yin

February 7, 1978 – January 27, 1979

Earth, yang

January 28, 1979 – February 15, 1980

Earth, yin

February 16, 1980 – February 4, 1981

Metal, yang

February 5, 1981 – January 24, 1982

Metal, yin

January 25, 1982 – February 12, 1983

Water, yang

February 13, 1983 – February 1, 1984

Water, yin

February 2, 1984 – February 19, 1985

Wood, yang

February 20, 1985 – February 8, 1986

Wood, yin

February 9, 1986 – January 28, 1987

Fire, yang

January 29, 1987 – February 16, 1988

Fire, yin

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

February 17, 1988 – February 5, 1989

Earth, yang

February 6, 1989 – January 26, 1990

Earth, yin

January 27, 1990 – February 14, 1991

Metal, yang

February 15, 1991 – February 3, 1992

Metal, yin

February 4, 1992 – January 22, 1993

Water, yang

January 23, 1993 – February 9, 1994

Water, yin

February 10, 1994 – January 30, 1995

Wood, yang

January 31, 1995 – February 18, 1996

Wood, yin

February 19, 1996 – February 6, 1997

Fire, yang

February 7, 1997 – January 27, 1998

Fire, yin

January 28, 1998 – February 15, 1999

Earth, yang

February 16, 1999 – February 4, 2000

Earth, yin

February 5, 2000 – January 23, 2001

Metal, yang

January 24, 2001 – February 11, 2002

Metal, yin

February 12, 2002 – January 31, 2003

Water, yang

February 1, 2003 – January 21, 2004

Water, yin

January 22, 2004 – February 8, 2005

Wood, yang

February 9, 2005 – January 28, 2006

Wood, yin

January 29, 2006 – February 17, 2007

Fire, yang

February 18, 2007 – February 6, 2008

Fire, yin

February 7, 2008 – January 25, 2009

Earth, yang

January 26, 2009 – February 13, 2010

Earth, yin

February 14, 2010 – February 2, 2011

Metal, yang

February 3, 2011 – January 22, 2012

Metal, yin

January 23, 2012 – February 9, 2013

Water, yang

February 10, 2013 – January 30, 2014

Water, yin

January 31, 2014 – February 18, 2015

Wood, yang

YO U R E l E M E N TA l E N E RGY T Y P E

85

The Five Elemental Personality Types
In Feng Shui it’s important to reinforce your own elemental
energy within your home. This can be complicated if you are part
of a large family, yet you can still use your own special corner of a
room and personalize it to boost your energy ﬂow. Each member
of the family can have one as well. Review your own element’s
expression, and then create a sacred corner for yourself and for
your loved ones.
Note: If you discover that your family consists of mainly one element—for example, if everyone is fire—then obviously any added
fire enhancements would put the home out of balance. In this
case, you’d be wise to add harmonious energies via the elements
that are compatible with yours.

If You’re Fire
You are impulsive and idealistic, and you’re enthusiastic
about everything you do. With lots of energy to expend,
you rarely sit down for long and you need an active lifestyle and busy social life. In love relationships, you need
to be the dominant partner and you want exclusive attention in return. Concern with playing the leading role in someone
else’s life means that you often neglect other people’s needs, so
it’s important to learn to be more compassionate and tolerant
in the home. Fire people thrive on friendship and companionship. You have high expectations of loyalty, and you don’t take
it lightly if someone abuses your friendship or gossips about you
behind your back. There’s more hope, optimism, and sensitivity in

86

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

your heart than many people would believe, for all your outgoing
impulsiveness. As self-image and self-love take up a lot of your
time, you must learn to go with the ﬂow and not try to make others run at your pace. You’re passionate about life and love, and
you need a partner who can give you the freedom and space that
you need.
In Feng Shui, earth and wood cures are the best choices for
harmonizing your home and making it compatible with your personality. You produce a lot of energy, and it’s buzzy and electric,
so too much fire in the home can make your own inner Bagua
energies burn out. Expressing anger is healthy, but you need to
learn to channel this energy in a positive way, perhaps through
sports, dancing, other kinds of physical activity, and healthy
debates .

If You’re Earth
Reliable and committed, you’re likely to be
the practical one in the household. You hate
change, but when committed to a relationship you’ll stick it out through thick and thin,
even if it’s diﬃcult. Sensuality is a keyword
for you. Whether it’s the pleasure of food,
sex, or just taking a walk through the park, the back-to-nature
side of you needs to be expressed and energized. You prefer
peace and stability to action and spontaneity, but that doesn’t
prevent you from being a romantic. Avoiding conﬂict, you’ll do
anything for an easy life, but this can get you into trouble because
you never express what you truly want. This can lead to growing
resentment, either from you or within the home. You can be very

YO U R E l E M E N TA l E N E RGY T Y P E

87

possessive, so you need to let your partner have some space. You
give out a great deal of warmth, affection, and gentleness, and
you expect it from others in return.
In Feng Shui, fire and metal cures will help you to focus on
giving true love rather than expecting too much. Too much earth
enhancement in the home will make you more controlling, but
with the addition of spontaneous fire and the independent
nature of metal, you will begin to be easier and more compassionate to yourself, not just good to others.

If You’re Wood
Unconventional and intellectual, you need to maintain
your independence and you find it hard to live in a family setup unless the family lets you have a lot of personal
space and freedom. You have a practical streak, but you’d
rather talk about life and love and analyze relationships
than get too personal. Love is something that happens in your
head rather than your heart. You avoid your feelings, and you prefer a lover or partner who is neither slushy nor sentimental. You
thrive best with someone who is very much your equal, but it’s
hard for anyone to live up to your high ideals. You can cause problems in relationships by refusing to listen to others and stubbornly
persisting in your own viewpoint. Friends are more important to
you than relatives, and your social life takes up as much time as
your work. What you need most is someone who honors your
need for freedom but who can still be there for you as a friend.
In Feng Shui, too much wood in your home will make you
more opinionated and rebellious, so avoid filling your house with

88

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

hundreds of potted plants. Reinforce your personal energy with
moderation and balance by using water and fire cures.

If You’re Metal
Competitive and ambitious, you thrive in
a conventional relationship and believe
that the family and home are very much an
expression of your own image and status. In
fact, you can get so obsessive about your home that it becomes
a show house rather than a real home. There is a very self-reliant
and determined aura about you, and it gives you the ability to get
ahead in your career and achieve what you set out to do. In love
relationships you look for status, prestige, love, and honor in one
person, and as this perfect combination is so hard to find, you may
prefer to stay single. Your fear of losing love is as great as your
desire to find your ideal partner. This is where you compensate
in other areas of life by working hard in your career. You may be
the epitome of cool, and you may have a casual and unﬂustered
attitude toward relationships. Being serious about life means you
sometimes forget to laugh about it, too, but when you do laugh
you reveal a wry and very dry sense of humor. You fear intimacy
because it reveals your own inner vulnerabilities, but when you
do get involved with someone, you usually want to be the boss.
Loyal and single-minded, you’re unlikely to stray once you find
someone who can build your empire with you.
In Feng Shui, too much metal in your home may bring you
great success in life, but it will ultimately create friction in love
relationships simply because you’ll become more ruthless and

YO U R E l E M E N TA l E N E RGY T Y P E

89

self-centered. To free yourself from the chain mail around your
heart, introduce earth and water cures.

If You’re Water
Not only are you idealistic and easily led astray, but you’re
one of the most romantic and sensitive people around.
Although you love to socialize, when you’re at home you
need plenty of privacy and a room of your own where
you can retreat. Unpredictable and elusive, you love to be in love,
and it doesn’t really matter with whom, as long as you can throw
yourself into the magical, out-of-this-world feeling that being in
love creates. However, for all your unfocused and almost gullible
attitude to love, you never really let anyone into your emotional
space, and your constant need for change makes it hard for anyone to understand your chameleon-like moods. You are versatile,
spontaneous, and imaginative, and you have an extraordinary
ability to play any role, so you become exactly like the person
you’re with. This means that you rarely know yourself, and if you
don’t know who you are, you can bet that your partner doesn’t
have a clue, either. You may have to experience many different
relationships before you find your perfect lover. If, however, you
find someone who protects and adores you but gives you enough
room to be yourself and enough space to feel you haven’t committed your entire self, you’re likely to stay put.
In Feng Shui, too much water in the home can make you even
more changeable, restless, and lost. Introducing a balance of
metal and wood cures with subtle nuances of water will help to
give you a sense of your own boundaries and your own needs.

90

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

Whatever your personal element is, and regardless of the elements of other people who live in your home, keep the center
of your home clear of mess. Keeping that area clutter-free will
enhance the health and well-being of everyone living there. Keep
the center of each room clear as well, if possible. For ornaments
that have sharp points or edges, turn them so that the sharp part
faces the wall. Keep the bathroom door closed, especially if you
or your family don’t like keeping the toilet lid down.

YO U R E l E M E N TA l E N E RGY T Y P E

91

Creating a
Sacred Corner

9

W

hatever element you are identified with, a sacred corner of
your own can vitalize your inner energy and help promote

harmony and well-being in relationships. Once you have created
the space, don’t forget to dust it and keep it clear of clutter.

If You’re Fire
Be sure to use the south corner of your chosen room and a low
surface. Place a small mirror at the back of a low table against the
wall and place a single red candle or incense stick in front of the
mirror. Place a piece of carnelian or bloodstone next to the candle. Add a painting or photo of poppies or sunﬂowers. For extra
impact, place a prism in your sacred corner to refract and charge
every particle of light and energy.

S

W

E

N

If You’re Earth
For the best results, choose the southwest or northeast corner
of your chosen room. Try to keep the surface at about shoulder
height, and place a small picture of a landscape at the back of the
surface. Make sure the surface is covered with a piece of vintage

94

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

S

W

E

N
fabric or rich tapestry. Collect some shells or pebbles from a
beach or a garden and place them in a small terra cotta bowl, and
then put this in front of the images. You can also add a piece of
smoky quartz or moonstone for extra harmony.

If You’re Wood
Make your sacred corner at ﬂoor level and ensure that it’s in the
east or southeast corner of your chosen room. Cover the area
with velvet or a rich deep green fabric. Place a wooden sculpture
of a bird or green dragon on the fabric (you can find these figures

S

W

E

N

c R E AT I N G A SAc R E D cO R N E R

95

in local or Internet-based Eastern or New Age shops or even in
tourist traps). Hang a wooden frame on the wall behind the figures. A book or small spray of dried herbs can be placed to one
side of it, and a piece of malachite will make a grand centerpiece
and will add to the magical energy.

If You’re Water
Make sure your sacred place is in the north corner of your chosen room and at about knee height. Cover a ledge or small table
with silk or voile in a shade of Prussian blue or aquamarine. Hang
up or lean a painting of the sea or a waterfall or any image of
moving water against the wall. Place some blue beads in a small
glass vessel in the center. Alternatively, use a glass bowl full of
marbles. Find a stone cup, fill it with water, and sprinkle it with
glitter. Finally, add a piece of amber at the front to give you the
deep love connection that you need.

S

W

E

N

96

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

If You’re Metal
Choose a surface that is about waist height and in the west or
northwest area of your chosen room. Lean or hang a gilt- or silverframed mirror and place a silver, pewter, or stainless steel cup in
front of the mirror. Alternatively, you might choose to find an old

S

W

E

N
glass and paint it gold. Find a silver necklace and hang it from a
metal hook or candle sconce; add a small brass rubbing or etching
in the corner. Finally, place a diamond, selenite, or white quartz
crystal in the center.

A Welcoming Sacred Space
Even if you live in the tiniest of studio apartments or share a room,
you can easily make a sacred space. In this way, you will welcome
whatever you need most into your life. This space is rather like a
waiting room—a transitory place where all those who travel take

c R E AT I N G A SAc R E D cO R N E R

97

a rest, and then move on. This space will encourage people to
travel to your side and will help you to find new pathways and
to discover happiness. Create your sacred space near the main
entrance to your home.
Simply outline your chosen space in the air with your finger.
You can draw an imaginary circle, a figure eight, or any curved
shape, as long as it has no sharp angles, which would encourage
secret-arrow energy. Of course, you are doing this in only one
dimension, but imagine you’re doing it in a million dimensions.
Once you have traced the outline in the air, purify it with a piece
of white quartz crystal left in the room for a day and a night, as
this will charge the atmosphere with beneficial energy.
Each time you pass through this space, remind yourself that
it’s a welcoming space for those who enter your home and for
those who have yet to find the pathway to the space in your
heart .
To confirm that this is your magic space, copy the picture of
the talisman on the facing page on a piece of paper and place
it on the wall near the magic space or paint it on the wall as a
mural, if you prefer. This is an ancient Taoist talisman for combining good fortune and peace, and it deﬂects any uneasy or negative energy trying to enter your home.

98

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

c R E AT I N G A SAc R E D cO R N E R

99

Love and
Relationships

10

W

hen people are single, whether by choice or because of
circumstances beyond their control, they still want to be

in a love relationship, because loving partnerships are an instinctive part of human nature. Every person we meet becomes a
signpost that helps us find ourselves and accept who we are as
individuals.

To Attract Success in Love
Feng Shui can help you understand what love means to you. If
you create harmony in your home, you will find it easier to understand yourself and to love yourself, and as a result, it will become
easier to attract other people into your life who will love you.
Understanding your own desires, needs, and values is the way
toward healthy relationships. If you’re looking for new love, ask
yourself the following questions:
1.

If you’ve recently broken up with someone, ask yourself why
you split up. What were the motives behind the breakup?

2.

If you’ve never been in an intimate relationship, ask yourself whether you fear commitment or the exposure of your
vulnerabilities.

3.

Ask whether you have a problem attracting people to
yourself .

102

4.

Do you have a problem maintaining a relationship?

5.

Do you always pick the wrong types?

6.

Why do you think no one will ever be good enough for you?

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

7.

What kind of person are you looking for?

8.

Why can’t you stop thinking about someone from the past?

The Cures
The following cures are specifically related to the above questions. Use specific cures for the question or questions that you
feel to be most relevant, but be prepared for the situation to
change. The kind of love that is important to you now may well
change in time, but Feng Shui moves with you and changes with
you, just as love can change. Try not to instigate all the cures at
once, as this can lead to an overload of energy!

1.

Why did you split up?

Use the following cure in the southeast corner of your home so
that you can be at peace with yourself. Hang a rose quartz crystal
pendant in your window, or place it where natural light will refract
its loving qualities around the room.

2.

Do you fear commitment?

We fear that if anyone gets too close to us they’ll see behind the
mask and won’t like the real us inside. To project a more confident
aura of self-value, place a white quartz crystal in the southeast
area of your home. You can also reinforce this cure in the southeast corner of your bedroom.

3.

Do you have a problem attracting people to you?

Use the following cure as a great source of empowerment. Place
either a prism or a red glass bowl or wine goblet in the south

lOV E A N D R E l AT I O N S H I P S

103

corner of your home. Light some incense every evening to reinforce the attraction factor.

4.

Do you have a problem maintaining a relationship?

Whatever the reason for losing control of your relationships, use
the following cure in the northwest corner of your home. Place
four pinecones in a wooden bowl, or you can use a bowl of pine
nuts, which are available in delicatessens and supermarkets.
Mountain pine symbolizes longevity and commitment in Taoist
art, and its effect is considered to be stabilizing and grounding.

5.

Do you pick the wrong types?

If you frequently get caught up in this game, then use the following cure in the north corner of your home. Either hang a sodalite
pendulum in the window or place a piece of sodalite on the windowsill. Add a small mirror to reﬂect the crystal’s rays during the
day and to empower you with responsibility for your choices.

6.

Do you believe nobody is good enough for you?

You need to come down to earth. You’re probably an idealist with
high principles, and you might be so proud of your principles that
you are almost narcissistic. What you’re actually doing is compensating for your own sense of not being good enough by dumping
the problem on everyone you meet. The cure is to place a bonsai
tree or plant in the east area of your home to promote more tolerance and compassion for yourself and for others.

104

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

7.

What kind of person are you looking for?

This is often the most diﬃcult question to answer, because if you
have a problem identifying what you want from a relationship or
choosing the kind of partner who will fulfill your needs and love
you for being you, you can become completely confused. If this is
the case, instigate the following cure. Place a gold or silver ring, a
piece of gold-leaf paper, or a silver candlestick in the core area of
your home. This will promote integrity and confidence so that you
can begin to assert your own needs and discover who you are,
and thus the kind of person with whom you would be compatible.

8.

Having problems forgetting someone from your past?

If you can’t let go of the past and move on, use the following
cure in the west corner of your home. Take two small candles, one
white and one black (if you can’t get black, then buy the darkest
blue you can find), and stand them together in front of a window
or mirror. Light both candles. Gradually the black candle will draw
away the negative energy and the white candle will invoke clarity
and purpose. Once the black candle finally burns out, you will be
able to look forward to the future and move on.

lOV E A N D R E l AT I O N S H I P S

105

Harmonizing Love Relationships
If you are currently in a relationship, whether you live with your
partner or not, here are some cures and harmonizers to improve
your relationship. The choice of cure depends on which elements
you both belong to. So, for example, if you are metal and your
partner is fire, read the “Metal/Fire” section. All these cures will
boost both your romantic and your sexual rapport.

Metal/Metal
The metal/metal relationship is a highly magnetic and sexual
attraction that creates a volatile energy in the home. Many battles
of will may result from both partners’ stubbornness, but you’re
both ambitious and creative, and you make a powerful team.
Remember to honor each other’s need for autonomy.
To maintain the passion between you and to increase your
chances of joint success, make sure you keep the angles of furniture in your bedroom soft and the lighting subdued. Hang delicate muslin drapes at open windows or around the bed to ensure
that the Ch’i moves in curved lines through your personal space.
Bring water into your home to encourage ideas to ﬂow easily.
Add images of fast-ﬂowing rivers or waterfalls or an aquarium in
the southwest corner of your home. For emotional harmony, use
calming earth colors such as peach, coral, or camellia to inspire
genuine affection and admiration. Sensual bath oils and spicy
perfumes will maximize your other senses, too.

106

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

Metal/Fire
Metal is totally single-minded and fire can be very demanding,
and together this creates an erotic and powerful partnership in
the home. You both have a highly developed sense of ego, and
there could be power trips both in and away from the bedroom.
With action and diversity in your distinctive lifestyle, though, this
is an exciting and dynamic relationship.
Earth cures are essential here. For good sexual harmony,
spray perfumes or exotic scents over the bedsheets and pillows.
Keep a collection of comedy or blue films for late night viewing—
humor is essential to lighten up your volatile energy ﬂow. Keep
a bowl of fruit near the bed for erotic late night tantalizers. One
of the most energizing cures for you both is to place a piece of
pink tourmaline in the southwest corner of your home to activate
awareness of each other’s needs. Bring earth into the home via
color (ochres, yellows, russets) and nature. Choose plants with
strong sculptural qualities, or fossils, shells, and still-life paintings.

Metal/Wood
In the elemental cycle, metal destroys wood, and these elements
have opposite values—metal requiring ambition and convention,
wood needing freedom and new ideas to grasp—so this will be
an up-and-down relationship. Metal likes to assert its ideas, and
wood prefers to avoid those who believe they can assert themselves in this way. As with any polarity, though, there’s a strange
attraction toward each other’s very different qualities.

lOV E A N D R E l AT I O N S H I P S

107

For excellent sexual harmony, make sure your bed faces north,
and introduce water colors into the bedroom, such as shades of
deep blue or inky black, plus a contrast of a fire color to add a
splash of passion, perhaps fuchsia or geranium red. These cures
can be combined in fabrics, cushions, bed drapes, and covers.
This combination will inspire wood’s sense of cool detachment
and metal’s sense of eroticism. Warm up your emotions by placing a piece of carnelian beside your bed and an image of a green
dragon above your main doorway for dynamic loving.

Metal/Earth
Sensual and receptive earth adores metal’s erotic sexuality. This
is a good combination of energies, but there are times when you
can both be inﬂexible and self-absorbed, leading to miscommunication. Earth needs security and a loyal and strong partner. In the
home, earth can be very possessive about belongings, but metal
gives genuine support and is usually the power behind the throne.
The major problem is that metal and earth often spend more
time discussing their business or financial affairs than sharing
their sexual or romantic needs with each other. To lighten up the
heavy energy, bring fire energy into the bedroom in the form of
red candles or bright vibrant colors in images or in soft furnishings. Think about steamy nights and tumbling around in colorful
cushions rather than sitting in a cool and minimalist room. Place a
piece of amber on your windowsill to draw out diﬃcult energies,
and a piece of amethyst near your bed for complete surrender.

108

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

Metal/Water
The metal/water relationship is a challenging one, but sexual
sparks still ﬂy and the attraction factor is such that each finds
the other irresistible. Water is romantic and sensitive, dreamy and
elusive; metal is astute enough to recognize these mood changes.
Metal always maintains a solid and reliable base for water’s more
drifting, restless desires.
Use soft colors in the bedroom, such as pistachio, peppermint,
and almond blossom; fabrics, bed covers, or drapes in lavender
blues; or billowing muslin curtains and ﬂowing fabrics such as
voile and silk around the bed. Introduce strong, fast-growing
plants that don’t droop (trailing plants can drag water’s energy
down and depress metal). Introduce the missing earth factor in
the form of a bowl of natural stones. Add a piece of azurite in the
southwest corner of your home to clear away old memories and
any negative energy that may be blocking your mind or feelings.

Water/Water
In a water/water relationship, you’ve both got such changeable
natures that you find it diﬃcult to make decisions. There’s an
intangible quality to this relationship, and you often block out
the problems of the real world and drift aimlessly through life
together. Yet you’re both highly intuitive about the other’s sexual
and emotional needs.
Wood cures need to be introduced to help you deal more
eﬃciently with reality and to help you make decisions. Find a

lOV E A N D R E l AT I O N S H I P S

109

piece of driftwood for the southwest corner of your living room,
place a carved wooden statue or a four-poster bed in your bedroom, and put a pile of books in the south corner of your home.
Introduce images of landscapes and forests or plants in the bedroom. Add some fire cures to boost the sexual passion between
you by using red candles, fake-fur rugs, and crimson velvet cushions to bring out the eroticism between you.

Water/Fire
The water/fire relationship is a steamy one, and with such opposing energies in action, there are sure to be clashes right from the
start. Fire wants to know answers and is always seeking new
ideas and responses from his or her partner, but water doesn’t
like to give much away and won’t open up in the passionate way
that fire would like. However, fire likes to be in control of the relationship and water likes to be led, so sexually this can be a highly
erotic and romantic rapport.
To vitalize such totally different energies, use colors like strong
terra cottas or fruit and plant colors like mulberry, sage, ochre, or
orange. Introduce wood cures to the bedroom to harmonize and
encourage better communication about your sexual needs. Start
a bedroom library, or place a pile of books beneath the bed or
on a shelf by the window. To inspire each other in daily life, put a
small piece of jade or smoky quartz in a velvet bag and place it on
a ledge or shelf in the north corner of your home.

110

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

Water/Wood
The water/wood relationship matures with time, and both of
you can relate well to the other’s need for space and for novelty. Wood’s fear of intimacy feels relaxed and comfortable to the
laid-back water personality, and water can drift along with wood’s
ambivalent attitude to life without making too many demands.
There’s a powerful connection here, and for excellent sexual harmony, the addition of both earth and metal cures will boost not
only your sex life but also your sense of companionship.
It’s important that you don’t live in a basement or noisy neighborhood. This is not good energy for either wood or water, as
both these elements need space and tranquility. If you have no
choice but to live in a cramped area or one that is below ground
level, place a piece of green tourmaline or lapis lazuli in the core
area of your home, as they both emit a powerful protective
energy. If you happen to have been born in a metal year, you
should avoid adding large metal items to your rooms, as doing so
will create an imbalance. However, metal cures will enrich your
mutual integrity and goal orientation if introduced in gilt-framed
paintings, silver- or gold-threaded fabrics in the bedroom, or a
bowl of coins in the south corner of your home. Earth can be
incorporated in the form of incense, natural oils, or loofahs and
natural sponges in the bathroom.

lOV E A N D R E l AT I O N S H I P S

111

Water/Earth
The water/earth relationship makes for a diﬃcult exchange of
energy, as earth is essentially static and water is always changing.
The energy between you may become more like a muddy pond
than a ﬂowing form of passion if you don’t learn to communicate
your true feelings. Water needs to ﬂow away and earth needs to
feel physically moved. Water can give earth the giddy romance
that this element truly longs for, and earth can provide a solid and
reliable base for water’s more unpredictable lifestyle. It’s not an
easy relationship, but it is a fascinating one.
To maximize your energy ﬂow, make sure you have music in
the home, wind chimes in the southwest corner, and fire imagery
(like red balloons rising in the sky, or a picture of a fiery sunrise) in the bedroom. An open fire in your main living area promotes excitement and passion between you. Bring metal cures
into the home to keep you both aware of each other’s different
rhythms. Choose earthy metals such as wrought-iron chandeliers
or bronze and pewter goblets, bowls, or sconces to hold scented
candles. Place a piece of malachite or white quartz crystal in the
west corner of your bedroom for inspired passion.

Fire/Fire
The fire/fire relationship is an exuberant partnership. You’re
both energetic, passionate, and ready for adventure, and this is
a romantic, audacious, and provocative relationship. The only
downside is that you’re both headstrong and impatient, so if one

112

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

of you gets restless or bored, there is a risk of being led astray
or being led into seducing someone new. Fire people need sexy
companionship and they need to be adored, but they are not so
good at adoring or being deeply emotionally involved with partners. This is a splendid combination if you enjoy fun and games.
Earth cures can be incorporated in the home to give you a
chance to come down to earth and be more practical about your
financial affairs or your long-term needs. Living constantly for
future possibilities means you miss out on the present. Place a
bowl of figs, peaches, or apricots in your bedroom, or eat oysters
and drink champagne as an aphrodisiac for great sexual rapport.
To keep the ﬂames of passion from straying, place a silver-edged
mirror in the west area of your home and hang a crystal in your
hall or entrance to augment loyalty and commitment.

Fire/Earth
The fire/earth relationship makes for an interesting rapport
because fire admires earth’s ability to get things done, and earth
loves fire’s enthusiasm and creative ideas. Somehow, cautious
earth and rash fire create a dynamic that is mutually supportive.
The downside is that you both have very different energy ﬂows,
as fire is fast paced and impatient, while earth is slow and sensual.
This can be frustrating, but it is also highly original.
For sexual harmony, it’s important to incorporate wood cures
into the bedroom, whether in the form of a wooden sculpture or
a four-poster bed. To ground fire’s reckless attitude and vitalize
earth’s sensuality, place a piece of onyx under the bed. Climbing

lOV E A N D R E l AT I O N S H I P S

113

plants can be placed in the west sector of the home, and add
metal in the south corner of your living room in the form of a
black-and-white photograph, engraving, or brass rubbing to activate mutual integrity.

Fire/Wood
Smooth, sophisticated, and yet romantic, both fire and wood
identify with personal space and freedom. Neither gets too hung
up about the emotional side of relating, and each thrives on madcap ideas, adventure, and having fun. The idea of using Feng Shui
in the home may be too much of a drag for fire, because fire can’t
be bothered to spend time thinking about it, but wood will spend
all night figuring it out!
Metal cures will help you to focus on the aspirations you hope
to achieve and give you both the ability to ground your goals. Use
black-and-white fabrics in the bedroom, and introduce bronze,
stainless steel, or silver objets d’art into your main living area.
Place a white quartz crystal or a diamond, if you’re lucky enough
to have one, on a windowsill in the southwest corner of your
home. This will keep the power of your instincts in harmony with
the passion of your independent needs.

Wood/Wood
Too much wood makes for an unconventional relationship, and
while that’s okay for some, it can be too unsettling for others.
Wood is fine for those who don’t like routine living, for those who

114

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

want to spend their time traveling the world, and for those interested in social action and making the world a better place.
For a creative sex life, bring sensual earth into your home
with a glass jar of shells, coral, pebbles, or crystals. Decorate your
home in simple colors—whites and creams or robin’s-egg blue—to
give you and your partner a deeper sense of commitment. Gold is
a valuable energizer for eternal romantics, so introduce bed covers or drapes with gold designs or threads. For sheer indulgence,
have a huge mirror that reﬂects daylight in the south corner of
your home. To maximize sexual harmony, place a piece of rose
quartz crystal on the windowsill near your bed.

Wood/Earth
There are very different energy ﬂows in the partners in a wood/
earth relationship. Earth is dogmatic and essentially conventional
about love relationships, while wood is outgoing, ﬂexible, and
unpredictable, preferring to rebel rather than conform. However,
the chemistry between you can be erotic because of your very
differences. In the home, earth excels in sensual surroundings,
while wood prefers a more minimalist atmosphere, so great compromises will have to be made to create harmony.
Don’t encourage too much metal in the home, as it’s destructive to wood; however, it’s highly beneficial to earth, so introduce
a little subtle energy with wind chimes. Fire can energize your
sexual dynamics, so add candles and mirrors to your living area.
Use reds and deep midnight blues or inky colors in fabrics and
cushions. Place a piece of amethyst in your bedroom where the

lOV E A N D R E l AT I O N S H I P S

115

sunlight can activate the crystal’s quality of trust and enhance
your awareness of each other’s needs.

Earth/Earth
The earth/earth relationship is a highly erotic partnership, both
sexually and creatively. Both of you do understand intuitively how
to please the other, and you’re both driven to create a materialistically sound and secure lifestyle. However, because you’re both
stubborn and determined to prove a point, there may be the odd
sticky moment of sulks and silences. But the earth moves easily
for you both, and whether making love or making money, you can
get your act together .
Ensure that you incorporate water cures to activate a more
ﬂexible and dynamic energy. If you can’t cope with a bubbling
fish tank, use images of waterfalls, oceans, and even rainstorms.
Other water cures can be added using images of fish, or paint
the walls in deep inky colors if you dare. Use velvet curtains and
dark sumptuous fabrics in your bedroom. Add a little fire to bring
sparkle and spontaneity to your love life with mirrors in the living
area. In the bedroom, place a piece of azurite to clear away the
past and inspire you for the future.

116

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

Sometimes nothing can stop a relationship from falling apart.
If you have attempted the Feng Shui cures, discovered that trying
to change the other person won’t work, and found that efforts to
change yourself just makes you miserable, call it a day and move
on. Then use meditations that will help you to cut away from the
past and open the door to a bright new future.

lOV E A N D R E l AT I O N S H I P S

117

Prosperity
and Career

11

T

he north sector of your home is concerned with career matters, so you might have already introduced the simple cures

mentioned earlier in this book. However, if you want to create
opportunities for finding a better job, getting a promotion, or simply developing your reputation and image, you need to do some
more work in this area. Below are some Feng Shui tips that are
specifically aimed at career advancement or business success.

Bedroom Tips
You may be surprised that I suggest that you start by working on
the bedroom, but you need to encourage beneficial Ch’i to vitalize
your mind and keep you aware of your own level of success and
achievement even while you sleep. This will also attract success
to you. Don’t sleep with your back to the door, and don’t sleep
under a joist or beam, as this can lead to quarrels with colleagues
or diﬃculties with bosses. You don’t need to be blamed for the
mistakes that others make. Try to sleep with the headboard facing
your most auspicious direction.
The position of your chest of drawers or dressing table is
important, too, because this is where you prepare yourself for
the day ahead. Facing your most auspicious direction when you
get dressed every morning will exert an empowering impact on
your work during the day. Just make sure the mirror doesn’t face
your bed .
In the northern corner of your bedroom, place a bright light
or a metal cure, such as a gold- or silver-framed painting, or copper or brass wind chimes. Always check for protruding corners
of furniture or hard angles of footboards or walls. To deﬂect this

120

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

SOUTH

Window

Closet

NORTH
Auspiciously arranged bedroom: the closet here is a projection of the northeast
area (education and knowledge).

secret-arrow energy, hang soft fabrics over the edges or the corners, or place a plant in front of the angle to create spirals of beneficial Ch’i. However, never place earth cures in the north corner
of your bedroom, as earth destroys water in the destructive cycle
of elements.

Out and About
Traditionally, most people who have a profession, career, or
business spend a good portion of the day away from home,
but these days many people work at home. The following section can be applied to your workspace, at home or elsewhere,

PROSPERITY AND cAREER

121

because we take Feng Shui with us wherever we go. Each person has his or her own unique energy field, so it’s important
that when you’re negotiating a deal, meeting clients, going for
an interview, entertaining important contacts, or simply getting
on with your business you’re facing your best direction. If you
don’t know which direction you’re facing in a conference room,
for example, or when being introduced to a new client in his or
her oﬃce, take a small compass along and figure out what direction you’re facing. Try to sit facing your most auspicious direction to maximize your success; use this direction in all important
business meetings.

Your Home Oﬃce or Study
Oﬃces, too, should be arranged in such a way that they have
optimum layout; bad layouts, of course, will create bad energy.
Use the directions that follow to figure out the best kua directions
for your oﬃce layout.

Favorable Desk and Work Locations
It’s obviously important to be focused, sensible, and calm at
work. You probably have to make lots of decisions, or perhaps
deal with people who aren’t the greatest diplomats in the world.
So the direction you face when working in an oﬃce is highly
important. The other beneficial tip is to always introduce softeners to your oﬃce, such as plants to absorb all the secret-arrow
energy from angular oﬃce furniture, bookshelves, and window
blinds.

122

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

Bookcase
Desk
Window

Plants

Good oﬃce layout.

Bookcase

Window

Desk
Plants

Bad oﬃce layout.

If you sit in your most auspicious direction and if you can also
manage to have a view of the door, this creates excellent energy
for clear thoughts, good client contact, and personal success.
Never sit with your back to a doorway or window if you can help
it, as it can make you feel uneasy.

PROSPERITY AND cAREER

123

Kua Directions
1.

Take the last two digits of your birth year and add them
together. For example, if you were born in 1970, then you’d
add 7 and 0, to equal 7. If the result is greater than 9, add the
two digits together to get a final result of a single digit.

2.

If you’re a female, add 5 to the number that you have
produced .
For example, 5 + 7 = 12.

3.

If you’re male, subtract your answer from 10.
For example, 10 - 7 = 3.

4.

If the number you end up with is greater than 9 (as in the
female example, above) add the two digits together and
reduce them to one.
For example: 1 + 2 = 3.

5.

If the answer is 5 and you are male, your most auspicious
direction is the same as it is for number 2.

6.

If the answer is 5 and you are female, your most auspicious
direction is the same as for number 8.

Example 1
1.

Warren was born on January 17, 1984.

2.

The Chinese New Year was February 2 in that year, so he has
to move his year of birth back to 1983.

124

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

3.

He adds the last two digits of his year together:
8 + 3 = 11.

4.

He must now reduce this to one number:
1 + 1 = 2.

5.

He now takes 2 away from 10:
10 - 2 = 8.

6.

Warren’s kua number is 8.

Example 2
1.

Darcy was born on September 28, 1987.

2.

She now adds the last two digits of her year together:
8 + 7 = 15.

3.

She must now reduce this to one number:
1 + 5 = 6.

4.

She must now add 5 to the number:
5 + 6 = 11.

5.

She must now reduce this to one number:
1 + 1 = 2.

6.

Darcy’s kua number is 2.

PROSPERITY AND cAREER

125

Favorable Directions for Your Kua Number
1 . Southeast
2 . Northeast
3. South
4. North
5. (Male) Northeast
(Female) Southwest
6. West
7. Northwest
8. Southwest
9. East
You can also create more dynamic success by keeping the desk
free of clutter and by adding a metal cure in the north corner of
the desk (three coins are highly auspicious).

Computers
Computers are yang activators and are therefore auspicious in
your oﬃce (but never in the bedroom). Computer screens generate a lot of energy, but too much can overdo the yang energy so
that you literally burn yourself out with too much work. Balance
heavy computer energy with a yin color scheme such as soft
shades of blue in the furnishings, or add plants to soften and calm
the highly volatile yang energy.

126

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

The Wealth Corner
The southeast corner of your oﬃce is concerned with wealth,
so, as you would in your home, enhance this corner with a water
cure. For example, set up a tank of fish, a small water feature, or
a photo or print image of moving water. Goldfish are symbolic
of wealth (gold) and happiness (red). Always use an odd number
of fish.

PROSPERITY AND cAREER

127

Career
Choices

12

Y

ou can use the Bagua in a different way to bring you good
fortune and progress in all your personal vocational needs.

Some of us want an easy life and more time to play, while others
want a high-powered job or the leadership of a large company.
These aspirations can change at different stages of your life, of
course; for instance, your focus may be in one direction while you
are bringing up children but may change once your children are
grown. You may want to alter and modify the kinds of cures that
you use as you change and develop. For example, if right now you
want an easy job, introduce cures that harmonize the west sector
of your home. In six months’ time, you might want a freelance job,
so you’d introduce some boosters to the north part of your home
instead.

Your Career Location
The Bagua shows qualities that relate to each of the eight compass
points and locations in your home. Look at the words and phrases
and decide on those that best describe your situation now; also
look at the descriptions that feel right for you at this time.

If You’re Fire
Fire people improve their chances of success in their chosen
field when wood cures are introduced into the career style location, with a touch of earth to let the energy ﬂow. In the cycle of
elements, wood feeds a fire and therefore creates a passion for
what you’re doing. Earth draws on fire to create a balance. Never
overdo cures. If you start filling the career style location with a

130

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

library’s worth of books or green walls and a million plants, you’ll
simply create an overload.
1.

Choose one of the wood colors in this sector of your home,
which means forest green, sage, rosemary, olive green,
thyme, cool peppermint, or soft pinky hues like the early
morning sky.

2.

Choose an earth color, such as twilight blue or pistachio,
tones evocative of meadows, light ochres, and the colors of
autumn. If you can’t see trees or gardens from this location,
hang a photo or picture of a landscape beside the window.

3.

Introduce a wooden sculpture or a gnarled piece of driftwood into the career style location. If you don’t like wood,
compromise with a sculptural plant such as a ficus or motherin-law’s tongue (also called a snake plant).

4.

Images for the wall can be either bold and direct line drawings or soft hues of watercolors. Books are also a good source
of wood energy. Although amassing a library of books isn’t
ideal because it puts the energy out of balance, add a mural
of false books or one shelf of your favorite novels. Don’t
pile them up on the ﬂoor, though, as this creates downward
secret-arrow energy that will bring you down to earth with a
bang.

5.

If the career style location happens to be in the bathroom,
then wood and earth cures really do come into their own,
because you can use shells and natural items such as loofahs
and sponges.

cAREER cHOIcES

131

6.

If your chosen career style location is in the kitchen, fill old
glass jars with cinnamon sticks or coriander seeds. Anything
that comes from the ground can be lined up on a kitchen
shelf .

7.

Finally, a single metal cure can be integrated into the career
style location to ensure success and belief in yourself. Add
a touch of gold paint or a gilt-framed picture. If the career
style location is in the bedroom, gold jewelry or costume
baubles hung from your bedpost or laid beside your bed
will do wonders for promoting positive energy in your mind
while you sleep.

If You’re Earth
To activate your career style location, you need to introduce fire
and metal cures to balance your earth energy. Too much wood
can drain your energy, so if this part of your home is filled with
wooden furniture or plants, try to relocate as many of them as
possible. Incorporate fire cures such as red candles and subtle but
crystal-clear lighting. There is so much choice of lighting these
days that you can easily treat yourself to something that isn’t garish or too bright but that gives a luminous quality to the location.
1.

If your career style location is in the kitchen, use stainlesssteel cooking equipment, and if you can afford to do so,
invest in a stainless steel work surface. Designs in gold leaf
or gold paint or gold-threaded fabrics are excellent metal
cures. Some artistic scrap metal pieces in the corresponding area of your backyard or even the bathroom can be a

132

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

powerful image of metal that will give you spirit and confidence in your goals.
2.

Choose one vibrant color and one softer tone to complement your earthy spirit. Try toning your walls with color
washes and tints against dramatically different woodwork.
Fiery colors like Indian reds, brilliant whites, crimson, even
tangerine will add zest to your career plans. Use one water
color only for drive and pure motivation, such as a dark mystical violet or Prussian blue or black.

3.

If the bedroom is the focus of the career style location, introduce cushions made from dark damasks or old French-style
tapestry. A metal cure here, such as a cast-iron bedstead or
gold-framed painting, will induce strength and determination to succeed and will create powerful energy for clarity.

If You’re Metal
To activate your chosen career style location, you need to harmonize this part of your home with water and earth cures. Earth
will instigate realistic values and strength of purpose toward your
goals, and water will give you a true sense of achievement and
intention to act.
1.

Place shells that you’ve bought or found on a beach, smooth
pebbles, or weathered stones in a bowl in the career style
location of your home. Flint is especially energizing for metal,
but if you can’t get hold of ﬂint, buy an unpolished piece of
amber and place it on the windowsill. A woodland image on
the wall will also bring earth energy into the location.

cAREER cHOIcES

133

2.

If your career style location falls in the kitchen, you can line
up all kinds of natural products on your shelves, such as
spices, dried herbs, and jars of rice, couscous, or lentils.

3.

A painting of the sea, a photo of waterfalls or surging rivers,
or a simple Japanese landscape will vitalize your career style
location with water’s communicative and proactive qualities. Water colors on the walls will depress someone of your
elemental group, so instead place a bowl of blue marbles on
the highest surface in the room. You may not be able to see
the dark blue hues, but they will be working on your behalf.
Add one of earth’s warm terra cottas, yellow ochres, or rich
umber to your color scheme in this location to help you to
understand and relate better to other people as you develop
your career potential.

4.

To capture the essence of water, if your career style location falls in the bedroom, introduce fabrics, blinds, cushions,
or bed covers that have a hint of blue. Avoid wrought-iron
furniture because while it represents your element, it will
become a highly charged magnet and confuse your sense of
commitment and integrity. Place a pink shell or rose quartz
crystal by your bed to bring you a sense of love for your work
rather than the sense that it is just a means to an end.

If You’re Water
To boost your career style location, you need to introduce metal
and wood cures. Hollow metal wind chimes are highly beneficial to your career style location, as are gold and silver coins,

134

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

gold-framed photos, black-and-white images, or silver-threaded
cushions and jewelry. Place a piece of malachite on a windowsill
to enhance the integrity and purpose of metal energy, as this will
do wonders for boosting your career opportunities in your chosen
field.
1.

Wood animates your awareness of what you can and can’t
achieve. We all have limitations, and wood cures allow us to
accept them rather than trying to be too idealistic. Find a
wooden carving of a bird because birds symbolize the ability to ﬂy toward your goal with no hindrance. Alternatively,
incorporate wooden furniture or sculpture to activate this
area. However, avoid overstimulating your career style location with too much wood, as you will end up not really sure
about where you are going!

2.

Music is a fantastic cure to promote stability and rhythm
in your career development. It also reduces your oversensitivity about dealing with people. Again, you can use
wind chimes, but also introduce a musical instrument to this
area of your home. Even if you don’t play an instrument, buy
a recorder, an old ﬂute, a tambourine, or another instrument
that you find in a secondhand store, or just play music in
your career style location. If it happens to be the bathroom,
then sing in the bath.

3.

Use wood and metal colors to complement each other, for
example, soft greens and a touch of silver, gold, or bright
white. Introduce stainless steel objects if your career style
location falls in the kitchen or bathroom, and use plants

cAREER cHOIcES

135

that are upright rather than ﬂoppy. Trailing plants tend to
depress energy, and they will make you feel that you’re
going nowhere fast. Upright sculptural plants are vitalizing
and beneficial for career direction.

If You’re Wood
To activate and boost the career style location of your home,
you need to introduce both water and fire cures. Fire is all about
brightening up the location to bring you clarity and focus.
1.

If your career style location falls in the kitchen, make sure
you have a powerful light source when cooking or entertaining. Hang a string of dried chili peppers on the door or wall.

2.

If you don’t have an open fireplace in your career style location, then you can always hang paintings or photos of fire
scenes—anything from a mellow bonfire scene to a cosmic
explosion of stars.

3.

If your career style location is in the bathroom, light candles
when you bathe or listen to music when you’re washing.
Choose “fire tunes” such as “Smoke Gets in Your Eyes,” ”Ring
of Fire,” or “London’s Burning.” If you’re working with your
bedroom, try to find an old piece of stained glass and lean it
in the window to catch the sunlight.

4.

Water is highly auspicious in your career style location; it can
be incorporated as an aquarium or fish tank, or if the location happens to fall in the bathroom, use an elegant bath or
basin, or fish images on the tiles.

136

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

5.

Find or draw pictures of dragonﬂies or frogs, and incorporate water colors such as deep blues and inky blacks into
your décor or soft furnishings.

6.

If your career style location is in the bedroom, hang paintings of waterfalls, fast-moving streams, or waves rolling
onto a beach. Use blue carefully in the bedroom, as it can
create disturbed sleep patterns. A touch of rich royal blue
and deeper violet can be introduced in fabrics and curtains.
Lastly, introduce some coral or a piece of amber to the bedroom to give you strength of purpose and induce good decision making in your chosen field.

cAREER cHOIcES

137

Balancing
Energy
through
Décor

13

T

his chapter provides a rundown of how to use color and
décor in your home to balance the general energy. It’s a use-

ful source of ideas for creating harmony for your own element
and for improving your environment. It also tells you how to use
colors successfully and when to avoid certain shades.

Color Associations with the Bagua

140

Red:

Fire

Orange:

Fire

Yellow:

Earth

Ochre:

Earth

Brown:

Earth

Green:

Wood

Turquoise:

Wood

Blue:

Water

Violet:

Water

Black:

Water

White:

Metal

Gold:

Metal

Silver:

Metal

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

Red Shades: Fire
Red is exciting; it stimulates rather than moderates, so it must be
used with care. In some cases, reds and associated tones such as
purple and pink can add spice to your love life or add a dash of
drama and intrigue to a dull lifestyle. Handle this color with care,
though. Don’t use too much, or you could encourage angry and
destructive feelings rather than dynamic energy. In nature, red is
rare, so always use it in small quantities, in soft furnishings and
fabrics or in glassware or china that is decorated with rich reds
and oranges.

Blue Shades and Black Water
The blue spectrum can be responsible for bringing you down and
giving you the blues. Too much can make you depressed, when
what you need is to get in touch with your feelings and let them
ﬂow. However, you do need some of this color to bring your
home into complete harmony. Black, for example, could be introduced via black-and-white photos or etchings, engravings, and
line drawings. Blue jugs or dark blue china in the bathroom will
instill a sense of ﬂexibility in your home. Softer shades, such as a
touch of charcoal or a hint of gray-blue, can augment and channel
the emotional and feeling side of your nature, so that you don’t
lose touch with your ego or forget who you are.

Green Shades: Wood
Green traditionally moderates our senses and allows us to get in
touch with our roots and inner spirit. Trees and plant life are obviously valuable sources of green. In fact, natural greens, as in potted

BAlANcING ENERGY THROUGH DÉcOR

141

plants and vegetables in the kitchen, are far more auspicious than
putting green on the walls. Too much green can encourage daydreaming and idealism, however. Delicate shades of green can be
integrated into the décor. A highly auspicious place for green is
the front door, as this is our access to the outside world and it can
welcome beneficial Ch’i into our homes.

Yellow and Earth Shades: Earth
Yellow symbolizes inspiration and beliefs and energizes our sense
of reality. Bright yellows work well in kitchens and hallways,
but yellow is too stimulating a color in the bedroom. Yellow can
encompass all the earthy shades, too, including honey, chestnut,
and ochre. Spring ﬂowers are often yellow, but instead of thinking only of daffodils, try finding yellow ﬂowers or abstract designs
that add a touch of yellow to fabrics and furnishings.

White and Silver Metal
The use of white and silver can enhance your self-esteem and
determination to succeed. However, too much white can create cold, critical feelings among family members. If used subtly
throughout the home, white can bring purity and integrity to your
goals and aspirations. White is easily incorporated into the home,
but silver is a little more diﬃcult. The Chinese associate maturity
with silver, so encourage success and happiness by using a little
silver in the kitchen and bathroom. You can use silver cutlery, perhaps, or paint silver stars on the bathroom ceiling.

142

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

Mirrors
Mirrors reﬂect the energy in a home, but they also reﬂect the
energy that you create, so make sure you are putting out good or
auspicious energy for your mirrors to reﬂect.
1.

Mirrors should always be kept clean and free from dust, and
if for any reason your mirrors are cracked or scratched, it’s
best to throw them out. If you can’t get rid of them immediately, cover them with a cloth and store them somewhere
where you can’t see them.

2.

The bigger the mirror, the more energy is reﬂected, and
the more vibrant the household. Make sure mirrors aren’t
reﬂecting negative spots, though, such as cluttered bookshelves, a dirty laundry basket, a trash can, a bathroom, electrical cables, or blank walls.

3.

Try to use round or oval mirrors rather than square or rectangular ones, as the latter create hard angles and negative
energy. If you have no choice, introduce a water cure nearby
to help the energy ﬂow more ﬂuidly.

4.

Don’t sleep directly beneath or in front of a mirror. A mirror by the bed may enhance your sexual dynamics, but this
energy is too active and you’ll end up having a bad night’s
sleep .

Using Mirrors as a Remedy
If your home is not a square or a rectangle but some kind of “L”
shape, put mirrors on the insides of the walls that back onto the

BAlANcING ENERGY THROUGH DÉcOR

143

Place mirrors here.

Mirror
Mirror

Missing Bagua area: the east.

missing areas. The mirrors will create the illusion that something
is behind them and thus beyond the walls to which they are
attached. The reﬂection literally brings the missing Bagua area to
life .
In the Far East, mirrors that are used to protect and enhance
are in the shape of an octagon, like the Bagua. This shape reﬂects
the spirals of energy, and if placed at the end of a long hallway
or on the back door, it enables auspicious energy to stay in the
home, while deﬂecting negative energy or secret arrows back
into the environment.

144

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

Wind Chimes
To the Chinese, wind chimes are essential for the generation of
good energy and vibrations, and for the Ch’i to ﬂow easily. The
music of wind chimes also adds a subtle shift of emphasis to the
energy ﬂow in the home. When you buy wind chimes, make sure
you really like the tonal quality so that you are in tune with the
vibrations.
If you hang wind chimes inside your home, you may find that
you don’t hear them except in summer when the windows are
open and there’s a breeze; if this is the case, they won’t be of
much use to harmonize and circulate the Ch’i. Hang them near
the front and back doors or in porches, terraces or verandahs,
open carports, or sheltered patios. As long as you like the sound
and they don’t become a clattering mass of metal clinks every
time the wind blows, you will achieve the essence of movement
and positive Ch’i. If wind chimes are likely to drive your neighbors crazy, then it’s better to find some other way of encouraging
good luck into your house.

Water
Water features are very common in Asian homes and gardens.
The water element helps relationships to ﬂow, so it’s important
not to invite stagnant areas of water into your home. It’s fine to
have a goldfish bowl or an aquarium, but if the water never gets
changed and clouds up with fish waste, what does that say about
your life? If you opt for an aquarium, do ensure that you get one
with a filter to keep the water crystal clear and ﬂowing.

BAlANcING ENERGY THROUGH DÉcOR

145

If you don’t like fish, then you can always use a glass bowl
of colored water with petals or silver coins in it as your water
feature. Alternatively, paintings depicting the sea or a waterfall,
or a pond with a fountain or trickling water feature outside your
home will create positive and beneficial ﬂow for Ch’i.

Light and Bright
Bold lighting is yang energy, and it’s fine in certain areas of the
home, such as the kitchen and working areas, where you need to
feel motivated and dynamic. Soft and subdued lights are better in
the bedroom, where yin energy is prevalent. Soft candlelight can
stir romance and eroticism and generate good relationships.
If you want to enhance yang energy but you hate bright lights,
you can always use sparkling objects such as crystals, beads,
gems, and shiny metals. Hanging a polished crystal pendulum in
your window does wonders for this kind of energy, and the facets
of cut glass or droplets from a chandelier are wonderful ways of
scattering light across the room into all corners. Ensure that the
sun shining on the pendulum isn’t likely to start a fire. If you’re
lucky enough to have stained-glass windows in your house, take
advantage of their powerful activating energy. New stained glass
is not as auspicious as prewar glass windows because the pigment of the colors isn’t as pure. If you do find some modern
stained glass in good hues and tones, though, you can place a
piece of it in front of a window to energize the Ch’i.

146

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

Flowers and Plants
Most of us have plants in our homes, and this is one of the easiest
ways to add the wood element to your environment. However,
some plants can be more negative than positive.

Some Dos and Don’ts
• Use ﬂowers that are in season to create vibrant energy.
• Potted plants that come from jungles or rainforests should
be used only if you belong to a water element.
• Choose plants that don’t take over the home; their invasion
can create an imbalance of yin and yang.
• Put a money plant in the southeast and prosper!
• Ivy or anything that trails can turn your well-meaning
seduction act or takeover bid into a depressing dream.
• Speckled plants can create arguments between partners.
• Upright plants need lots of space or they can fill the home
with arrogance and meanness.
• Dried ﬂowers dry you out, both financially and emotionally.
• Spiky plants invite conﬂict, but rounded leaves generate
positive energy.

Artwork
Whether you collect watercolors, are addicted to photographs,
or prefer abstract painting, keep to your own rules, but do try to
modify the amount of wall ornaments you have and where you
place them. Adapt your original choices either by adding beneficial

BAlANcING ENERGY THROUGH DÉcOR

147

elements or by taking away obvious troublemakers from the
Bagua areas that are in need of change. For example, if you have
an abstract painting (fire) in the north sector of your house, this
will create friction in that area. Instead, move the abstract painting to a more auspicious part of the home and replace it with a
picture that has a more realistic quality to it.

Form and Shape
This category encompasses things such as wooden objects, furniture, sculpture, pebbles, natural objects, antiques, and even
the television. Inside the house it’s easy to place objects such as
antiques and furniture, but it is also important to harmonize the
outside of your home. This is where natural form can be placed
without being too obtrusive. For example, if you found that the
missing area of your Bagua was outside your apartment in the
communal hallway of the building, then placing a subtle stone
or pebble beside your doorway or in the area in question will be
enough to restore balance and harmony.
Some Chinese people maintain that the original purpose of
Feng Shui is to make the spirits of our ancestors happy. Or perhaps it’s to please our gods so much that when we get to heaven
we settle into the nicest part of it. I guess these are good enough
reasons for putting Feng Shui principles into practice, but most
of us are more concerned with our daily life than placating the
spiritual realm or preparing for our afterlife.
Chinese people are hard workers and they love to make a success of business, so they will spend a lot of money on a complete

148

FENG SHUI PlAIN AND SIMPlE

astrology and Feng Shui consultation for their place of work,
after which they call in the decorators to carry out the Feng Shui
requirements. We also want to improve our oﬃce or work place
for business purposes, but most of us also want to make our
homes work for us. With Feng Shui, we can hope to eliminate
the things that block our progress or suppress important aspects
of our lives .
Feng Shui is much like casting spells, smudging with lighted
bunches of sage to clear bad vibes, or lighting candles according
to magic rituals. The idea is to create an auspicious environment
for love and luck, and these activities focus our minds and hearts
in a way that encourages good Ch’i to enter our lives. We may
carry out rituals on occasion, but the effects of Feng Shui are
ongoing once we put them in place.

BAlANcING ENERGY THROUGH DÉcOR

149

Other Titles in the Plain & Simple Series
Angels Plain & Simple
Beleta Greenaway
Astrology Plain & Simple
Cass and Janie Jackson
Body Reading Plain & Simple
Sasha Fenton
Chakras Plain & Simple
Sasha Fenton
Chinese Astrology Plain & Simple
Jonathan Dee
Color Therapy Plain & Simple
Nina Ashby
Crystals Plain & Simple
Cass and Janie Jackson
Face Reading Plain & Simple
Jonathan Dee
Fairies Plain & Simple
Ralph Harvey
Flower Essences Plain & Simple
Linda Perry
Herbs Plain & Simple
Marlene Houghton
I Ching Plain & Simple
Kim Farnell

Medicine Wheel Plain & Simple
Deborah Durbin
Meditation Plain & Simple
Lynne Lauren
Numerology Plain & Simple
Anne Christie
Palmistry Plain & Simple
Sasha Fenton
Psychic Ability Plain & Simple
Ann Caulfield
Reflexology Plain & Simple
Sonia Jones
Reiki Plain & Simple
Philip Jones
Reincarnation Plain & Simple
Jass and Krys Godly
Runes Plain & Simple
Kim Farnell
Tarot Plain & Simple
Leanna Greenaway
Totem Animals Plain & Simple
Celia M. Gunn
Wicca Plain & Simple
Leanna Greenaway

Hampton Roads Publishing Company
. . . for the evolving human spirit
Hampton Roads Publishing Company publishes books on
a variety of subjects, including spirituality, health,
and other related topics.
For a copy of our latest catalog, call (978) 465-0504 or visit our
distributor’s website at www.redwheelweiser.com. You can also
sign up for our newsletter and special offers by going to
www.redwheelweiser.com/newsletter

Improving the Energy
in Your Life

and techniques for improving the energy in your life. You will learn to
harmonize and lay out spaces in your home to enhance your personal
energy, improve your overall well-being, and bring good fortune and
balance into your life. Bartlett oﬀers suggestions that target career and
prosperity, love and relationships, and health.
This plain and simple guide discusses how to:

• Declutter to clear the energy in your home
• Use the Chinese bagua (number square) to map out rooms to

•

This wonderful primer is for anyone interested in interior design, Chinese
legend and lore, and the creation of healing and harmonious living spaces.

FENG SHUI

Sarah Bartlett

P
L
A
I
N
&
S
I
M
P
L
E

PLAIN & SIMPLE

•

enhance energy
Employ the ﬁve elements to harmonize the energy of your
home
Use Feng Shui for the exterior of your home and outside
landscaping

